Topological Feasibility Guarantees for Differentiable Predictive
Control
Guangyu Wu a,b, Ján Drgoňa c
aDepartment of Mathematical Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden (Incoming)
bCollege of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
cDepartment of Civil and Systems Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, USA
Abstract
Differentiable predictive control (DPC), a self-supervised learning approach for approximating explicit model predictive control
(MPC) policies, offers significant computational advantages over online optimization-based MPC. However, feasibility guar-
antees, a core requirement for safe control, are currently provided either probabilistically or via online safety filters. The lack
of rigorous feasibility guarantees for offline policy optimization remains an open problem. This paper establishes deterministic
feasibility guarantees for DPC using a novel topological analysis of the induced reachable safe set, without requiring online
safety filters. By exploiting the inherent model-based nature of DPC, in which differentiable system dynamics are embedded
directly into the computational graph, we analyze the properties of the learned control policies and the corresponding system
states from topological and geometric perspectives. Inspired by our theoretical analysis, we propose a novel self-supervised
offline policy learning strategy that utilizes a proxy loss with Control Barrier Functions (CBFs). Crucially, these properties
not only significantly improve policy training but also enable the derivation of strict, deterministic feasibility guarantees from
a finite number of training samples. Extensive closed-loop simulations validate our theoretical findings, demonstrating that
the empirical constraint violations monotonically decrease to zero as the training sample size increases. Ultimately, this work
illustrates that DPC policy optimization yields formal safety certificates that are structurally unattainable with conventional
black-box methods, e.g., reinforcement learning (RL) or supervised learning-based approximate MPC, thereby providing a
new perspective on feasibility guarantees in learning-based control.
Key words: Differentiable predictive control, learning-based control, feasibility analysis, topology, safety filter.
1
Introduction
Model Predictive Control (MPC) computes control ac-
tions by repeatedly solving a finite-horizon constrained
optimal control problem using a predictive model of
the system [1–4]. By explicitly enforcing state and in-
put constraints together with suitable terminal ingredi-
ents, MPC provides recursive feasibility and closed-loop
stability guarantees under standard assumptions for a
broad class of systems [5–12].
There are three main paradigms for solving MPC prob-
lems: implicit MPC [13–16], explicit MPC [17–19], and
approximate MPC [20–22]. Implicit MPC computes the
Email addresses: gwu1@alumni.nd.edu (Guangyu Wu),
jdrgona1@jh.edu (Ján Drgoňa).
1 Part of the conceptual work was initiated while the author
was with Nanyang Technological University.
optimal control sequence online by solving an optimiza-
tion problem at every sampling instant, providing exact
solutions at the expense of substantial computational
effort. Explicit MPC shifts this computation offline via
multi-parametric programming [23, 24], yielding an ex-
plicit policy that can be evaluated efficiently online.
However, the number of critical regions grows exponen-
tially with the number of constraints, parameters, and
prediction horizon, limiting scalability [25]. Approxi-
mate MPC addresses this limitation by replacing the
exact explicit solution with a compact function approxi-
mator. Early approaches employed piecewise-affine rep-
resentations [26,27], while more recent methods leverage
kernel-based or neural-network approximators [20, 28].
These approaches are typically trained offline from op-
timal control trajectories generated by implicit MPC
and evaluated online through a single function eval-
uation, enabling orders-of-magnitude faster inference.
This computational efficiency, however, comes at the
arXiv:2608.10332v1  [eess.SY]  11 Aug 2026


expense of theoretical guarantees. While probabilistic
guarantees have been established for neural-network
approximations [20], deterministic guarantees remain
difficult to obtain. Recent kernel-based methods [28] ad-
dress this issue by deriving certified approximation error
bounds that recover deterministic closed-loop guaran-
tees. However, these methods suffer from the curse of
dimensionality and scale poorly to high-dimensional
nonlinear systems. Consequently, achieving determinis-
tic feasibility guarantees without sacrificing scalability
remains an open problem.
While existing approximate MPC methods rely on su-
pervised learning from optimal MPC trajectories, differ-
entiable predictive control (DPC) [29,30] adopts a funda-
mentally different paradigm. By embedding the system
dynamics directly into the learning architecture, DPC
optimizes an explicit control policy by differentiating the
MPC objective through closed-loop simulations, elim-
inating the need for expensive offline MPC solutions.
This self-supervised learning methodology significantly
improves scalability and flexibility, but providing formal
feasibility guarantees for the resulting policies still re-
mains a major challenge.
Existing safe learning-based control methods [31–33]
predominantly provide probabilistic rather than de-
terministic feasibility guarantees through statistical
confidence bounds, chance-constrained MPC, or prob-
abilistically constructed safe sets in reinforcement
learning [34–37]. To obtain deterministic safety guar-
antees, existing approaches generally follow one of two
paradigms. The first, exemplified by learning-based
MPC [38–44], learns the system model while retaining
an online MPC optimization step to preserve the recur-
sive feasibility and stability guarantees of implicit MPC.
The second augments learned explicit policies with on-
line safety mechanisms [45], including Control Barrier
Functions (CBFs) [46–51], Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reach-
ability [52–54], predictive safety filters [55–57], convex
optimization-based projection layers [58], and online
feasibility verification and fallback policies [59]. While
both paradigms provide formal safety guarantees under
suitable assumptions, they do so either by solving an op-
timization problem online or by modifying the learned
policy online. The former sacrifices the computational
advantages of explicit control policies, while the latter
may compromise trajectory-level performance when
corrective actions are applied myopically.
From this perspective, the central limitation is that
existing methods repair infeasible policies a posteriori
rather than constructing policies that are feasible by
design. Fundamentally, this reflects the absence of an
intrinsic characterization of the feasible control mani-
fold, requiring online corrective actions to recover safety
or feasibility [60–67].
These current limitations raise the fundamental ques-
tion of whether learning-based controllers can be trained
entirely offline while providing deterministic feasibility
guarantees comparable to those of optimization-based
MPC, without resorting to online optimization or safety
filtering. Such a capability would substantially improve
the reliability and practical deployment of learning-
based control in time- and safety-critical applications.
To answer this question, we establish a theoretical frame-
work for constructing DPC policies with strict determin-
istic closed-loop feasibility guarantees through offline
training alone. Our approach analytically characterizes
the topological structure of the feasible control mani-
fold, ensuring that the learned explicit policy satisfies
feasibility by construction and therefore requires neither
a posteriori online safety filters nor optimization-based
corrective actions.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. We
develop a novel topological framework for analyzing the
feasibility of DPC policies, establishing deterministic
closed-loop feasibility guarantees from a finite number of
offline training samples under mild assumptions. Build-
ing on this analysis, we develop a self-supervised offline
learning strategy based on a Control Barrier Function
(CBF) proxy loss that constructs neural control policies
satisfying feasibility by design, eliminating the need for
online safety filters or optimization-based corrective ac-
tions. Finally, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework on several nonlinear control bench-
marks, with theoretical guarantees corroborated by em-
pirical results showing that constraint violations vanish
as the number of training samples increases.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion 2 defines the parametric optimal control problem
formulation and reviews DPC methodology. Section 3
presents the proposed topological feasibility analysis,
and Section 4 introduces the corresponding CBF-guided
offline training strategy. Section 5 discusses the proposed
framework, while Section 6 presents numerical results.
2
Differentiable Predictive Control
We consider the continuous-time process governed by
dxt = f(xt, ut) dt
(1)
where xt ∈Rnx denotes the state vector and ut ∈Rnu
the control input. The function f : Rnx × Rnu →Rnx
represents the deterministic drift term of the dynamics.
The formulation (1) is a general form of the ODE where
f is either linear or nonlinear.
To obtain a discrete-time representation, the continuous-
time dynamics are numerically integrated over each sam-
pling interval. Consider the time interval [0, T]. The de-
terministic drift term is discretized using e.g., a Runge
2


Kutta scheme, yielding the nominal discrete-time map-
ping F : Rnx × Rnu →Rnx. Denote N as the prediction
horizon, and k = T
N as a discrete time step. The result-
ing discrete-time state-space model is then expressed as
xk+1 = F(xk, uk),
(2)
where xk ∈Rnx denotes the system state at time step k.
We first review the differentiable predictive control
(DPC) method in [29] for the ODE system governed by
(2). In contrast to implicit MPC, which optimizes the
control input trajectories online for a given single para-
metric instance, the DPC aims to optimize an explicit
policy π : (xk, ξk) →uk that maps the current state
and parameters to the control action.
We give a parametric formulation for the infinite-
dimensional mapping π, referred to as a neural control
policy, of which the parameters are denoted as W. The
problem parameters, reference state, state constraint
and input constraint are denoted as ξk, rk, phk, pgk re-
spectively. The differentiable predictive control can be
formulated as
min
W LNC(xk, uk, rk)
(3a)
s.t.
xk+1 = F(xk, uk), k ∈NN−1
0
(3b)
uk = πW(xk, ξk)
(3c)
h(xk, phk) ⩾0
(3d)
g(uk, pgk) ⩾0
(3e)
x0 ∈Rnx, ξk = {rk, phk, pgk, θ} ∈Rnξ,
(3f)
where the cost function reads
LNC(W)
= 1
mN
m
X
i=1
N−1
X
k=0

αlℓ

x(i)
k , u(i)
k , r(i)
k

+ αhpx

h

x(i)
k , p(i)
hk

+ αgpu

g

u(i)
k , p(i)
gk

+ αNpN

x(i)
N

(4)
with m being the number of training data samples, and
αl, αh, αg, αN being the weighting coefficients. The first
term in the RHS of (4) represents the performance met-
ric, which can be defined, e.g. as a reference tracking
term [29], ℓ

x(i)
k , u(i)
k , r(i)
k

=
x(i)
k −r(i)
k

2
2 +
u(i)
k

2
2.
The terminal penalty term pN(x(i)
N ) in the LNC for-
mulation is a standard MPC component designed
to ensure recursive feasibility and closed-loop sta-
bility. It can be synthesized using established meth-
ods [68–71]. The second, third and fourth terms in
the RHS of (4) represent the state, input and ter-
minal constraints respectively. The state and input
constraints can be written in the following general
forms
px

h

x(i)
k , phk

=
1
nh µx

h

x(i)
k , phk

and pu

g

u(i)
k , pgk

=
1
ng µu

g

u(i)
k , pgk

where
µx, µu : R 7→R are the functions that aim to penalize
violations of the constraints (3d) and (3e).
There are typically two types of penalty functions. The
first type has a less strict form. For example, the ReLU
function µ(x) = max(0, x) [29] and the GeLU function
µ(x) = x
1
√
2π
R x
−∞e−t2/2dt [72]. Because these functions
are defined on the whole real line R rather than ex-
actly on the feasible set determined by the constraints,
they implement soft penalties rather than hard con-
straints—the larger the deviation, the more the penalty.
The second type, in contrast, is strictly defined on the
domain confined by the constraints. A canonical exam-
ple is the log barrier [73]. For example, to let the system
state satisfy the constraint (3d), the function can be cho-
sen as µ(x) = −log(−x+ϵ), where ϵ > 0 is a sufficiently
small margin. Each type has clear advantages and dis-
advantages. To improve the feasibility of the learning-
based control policy, we propose to employ both types
of penalties in the following parts of the paper.
A fundamental consequence of adopting differentiable
closed-loop dynamics, stage costs, constraint mappings,
and terminal penalty functions is that the resulting
optimization problem becomes amenable to gradient-
based training via automatic differentiation, namely,
backpropagation through time (BPTT) [74, 75]. More
precisely, upon representing problem (1) as a compu-
tational graph, repeated application of the chain rule
yields the gradient of the DPC objective LNC with
respect to the policy parameters W.
For illustration and notational simplicity, consider the
scalar-input and single-stage setting m = 1 and N = 1
and write x(1)
0 , u(1)
0 , r(1)
0
as x, u, r. The corresponding
gradient expression is given by
∇WLNC = ∂ℓ(x, u, r)
∂W
+ ∂px(h(x, ph))
∂W
+∂pu(g(u, pg))
∂W
+ ∂pN(xN)
∂W
=∂ℓ(x, u, r)
∂x
∂x
∂u
∂u
∂W + ∂ℓ(x, u, r)
∂u
∂u
∂W
+∂px(h(x, ph))
∂x
∂x
∂u
∂u
∂W + ∂pu(g(u, pg))
∂u
∂u
∂W
+∂pN(xN)
∂x
∂x
∂u
∂u
∂W.
(5)
The explicit availability of the gradient representation
in (5) permits the application of first-order stochastic
optimization methods, including stochastic gradient de-
scent and its adaptive variants such as AdamW [76], for
the numerical solution of the parametric optimal control
3


problem (3). In practice, these derivatives may be eval-
uated efficiently through modern auto-differentiation
frameworks, for instance PyTorch [77].
3
Feasibility Analyses of DPC
The standard DPC algorithm has shown significant ad-
vantages in scalability and inference time. However, a
rigorous feasibility proof of DPC remains a significant
challenge. In this section, we will show that the feasibil-
ity of the DPC can be proved rigorously in topological
terms, with a sketch provided in Figure 1 to clarify the
analysis. We first denote the control input and the rela-
tive system state for sample initialization i at time step
k by the optimization problem (3) to be

u∗(i)
k
, x∗(i)
k

.
Fig. 1. A sketch of the proofs for feasibility analyses of DPC.
In this paper, we consider the feasibility of the DPC in
the manner of CBF [47]. The CBF guarantees feasibility
by defining a forward invariant subset of the state space,
ensuring that if a system starts within a feasible region,
the control law will always keep it there. For our discrete-
time setting, we define the discrete-time zeroing CBF
update condition
rk+1,l(x(i)
k ) :=
hl

x(i)
k+1, phk+1

−(1 −η)hl

x(i)
k , phk

> 0
(6)
for each safety inequality hl, where η ∈(0, 1]. Crucially,
we retain the exact identity mapping for hl(x) to pre-
serve the original geometry of the safe set (defined by
hl(x) ⩾0). Furthermore, the following results apply to
each constraint l; for brevity, the subscript l is omitted
where it does not cause confusion.
Let all xk, 0 ⩽k ⩽N in this section refer to the system
state passed through the state safety-proxy loss (14). We
first have the following assumption.
Assumption 3.1 (Lipschitz assumption of the safety
set). Denote the safety set
X(k) := {xk ∈Rnx : h(xk, phk) ⩾0}
and
W(k) := {uk ∈Rnu : g(xk, pgk) ⩾0} .
The function F : Rnx × Rnu →Rnx is locally Lipschitz
continuous on compact sets X ⊂Rnx and W ⊂Rnu,
for which X(k) ⊂X, W(k) ⊂W, ∀k ∈N, with Lipschitz
coefficients LF,x, LF,u ∈R+, where R+ denotes the set
of positive real numbers.
Assumption 3.2 (CBF condition satisfaction). For any
initialization of x0 in the feasible safety set, there always
exists a feasible control trajectory satisfying the CBF con-
dition (6).
Remark. We will first concentrate on the feasibility
proofs by this assumption and will focus on algorithm
design for achieving this condition in the subsequent
section.
Assumption 3.3 (Lipschitz continuity of h). There ex-
ists a neighborhood of the point (x⋆
k, phk) and constants
Lh,x > 0 such that for all (xk,1, phk) and (xk,2, phk) in
this neighborhood,
|h(xk,1, phk)) −h(xk,2, phk))| ⩽Lh,x,k∥xk,1 −xk,2∥.
Here, we note that phk are deterministic parameters that
do not depend on the state xk.
Assumption 3.4 (Lipschitz continuity of the neu-
ral policy). Assume that the learned neural con-
trol policy πW (xk, ξk) is locally Lipschitz contin-
uous with respect to the state xk on the compact
set X, with a Lipschitz constant Lπ
> 0. That is,
∥πW (xk,1, ξk) −πW (xk,2, ξk)∥⩽Lπ ∥xk,1 −xk,2∥.
Remark. It is worth emphasizing that our feasibility
guarantees do not rely on differentiability assumptions.
Indeed, even if the true optimal control mapping is non-
differentiable—and a differentiable function approxima-
tor (e.g., a multi-layer perceptron) is employed in the
DPC, the following results remain valid. Crucially, the
learned control policy need not be close to the true opti-
mal policy in any specific norm or metric. This minimal
reliance on structural assumptions distinguishes our ap-
proach from existing methods and enhances its practical
applicability in real-world scenarios.
Assumptions 3.1 and 3.3 have a similar form as the typi-
cal Lipschitz continuity for the model predictive control
of ODE control problem. By this assumption, we can
then prove the following lemma.
Lemma 3.5. Under Assumption 3.1, if X(0) is compact,
then each subsequent set X(k), 1 ⩽k ⩽N, is compact.
4


Proof. Fix k ∈{0, 1, . . . , N} and define the function
ζk(x) := h (xk, phk) ,
x ∈Rnx.
By construction, h(·, phk) is continuous in x. Hence ζk
is continuous on Rnx.
The safety set at time k can be written as
X(k) = {x ∈Rnx : ζk(x) ⩽0} = ζ−1
k ((−∞, 0]).
Since (−∞, 0] is a closed subset of R and ζk is continuous,
the preimage ζ−1
k ((−∞, 0]) is closed in Rnx.
Moreover, by Assumption 3.1 there exists a compact set
X ⊂Rnx such that X(k) ⊂X for all k. Therefore we can
equivalently write
X(k) = ζ−1
k ((−∞, 0]) ∩X,
which is an intersection of a closed set with a compact
set. Thus X(k) is closed and bounded, hence compact.
This argument applies to each k = 0, 1, . . . , N, so in
particular X(k) is compact for all 1 ⩽k ⩽N.
Remark. This lemma proves that the nominal safety
set at each time step k is compact. However, the proof
doesn’t take into account the reachability of X(k),
which means that a subset of X(K) is not achievable by
the h(xk, phk) ⩽0 in the previous steps 0 ⩽k ⩽K.
Denote the state sequence by X := (x0, . . . , xN), and
we have the following corollary.
Corollary 3.6. Denote the domain of uk
∈
Rnu
satisfying (3e) to be a compact set U. Define the
reachable sets R(0)
:=
X(0) and R(k + 1)
:=
{F (xk, uk) + Wk : xk ∈R(k), uk ∈U} for time step
k. The reachable safety set Xr(k) can then be written as
Xr(k) :=
{xk ∈R(k) : h (xk, phk) ⩾0} = R(k) ∩X(k).
(7)
We have Xr(k) is compact for each time step 0 ⩽
k ⩽N. Hence, the set of reachable safety sequences
X r := {X = (x0, . . . , xN)|xk ∈Xr(k)} ∈R(N+1)nx is
compact.
Proof. If R(k) is compact and U is compact, then their
Cartesian product R(k) × U is also compact. Since the
mapping
(x0, u0) 7→F(x0, u0)
is continuous, it maps compact sets to compact sets. We
note that R(k) are finite compact sets for 1 ⩽k ⩽N).
Therefore,
R(1) = F(R(0), U)
is compact. By (7) and Lemma 3.5, Xr(1) = R(1)∩X(1)
is also compact. Similarly, we could prove Xr(k), 2 ⩽
k ⩽N are compact sets. Therefore, X r is also compact,
which completes the proof.
In the previous results of this section, we have proved
the topological property of the set of all feasible system
state trajectories. Next, we would seek what property
each single data sample has by our proposed algorithm.
In the following lemma, we will first prove the Lipschitz
continuity of the function rk+1(xk).
Lemma 3.7. Let Assumption 3.1, Assumption 3.3, and
the assumption on the Lipschitz continuity of the neural
policy hold. Then rk+1(xk) is locally Lipschitz in xk in
a neighborhood of x⋆
k. The Lipschitz coefficient is
L := Lh,x,k+1(LF,x + LF,uLπ) + (1 −η)Lh,x,k
(8)
Proof. Take two points xk,1 and xk,2 in a neighborhood
of x⋆
k. Let the corresponding control inputs generated
by the learned neural policy be uk,1 = πW(xk,1, ξk) and
uk,2 = πW(xk,2, ξk). Then
|rk+1(xk,1) −rk+1(xk,2)|
⩽
h
 F(xk,1, uk,1), phk+1

−h
 F(xk,2, uk,2), phk+1

+ (1 −η)
h(xk,1, phk) −h(xk,2, phk)
.
For the first term, by the Lipschitz continuity of h and
phk+1(·) (Assumption 3.3), the local Lipschitz continuity
of F with respect to both state and control input (As-
sumption 3.1), and the Lipschitz continuity of the policy
network with constant Lπ (Assumption 3.4), we have
h
 F(xk,1, uk,1), phk+1

−h
 F(xk,2, uk,2), phk+1

⩽Lh,x,k+1∥F(xk,1, uk,1) −F(xk,2, uk,2)∥
⩽Lh,x,k+1

LF,x∥xk,1 −xk,2∥+ LF,u∥uk,1 −uk,2∥

⩽Lh,x,k+1

LF,x∥xk,1 −xk,2∥+ LF,uLπ∥xk,1 −xk,2∥

= Lh,x,k+1(LF,x + LF,uLπ)∥xk,1 −xk,2∥.
For the second term, using the Lipschitz continuity of h
in the first argument, we obtain
h(xk,1, phk) −h(xk,2, phk)
 ⩽Lh,x,k∥xk,1 −xk,2∥.
Combining the above inequalities yields
|rk+1(xk,1) −rk+1(xk,2)| ⩽L∥xk,1 −xk,2∥,
where
L := Lh,x,k+1(LF,x + LF,uLπ) + (1 −η)Lh,x,k.
Thus rk+1 is locally L-Lipschitz in x near x⋆
k, which
completes the proof.
5


Define the standard open Euclidean ball
Bεk

x⋆(i)
k

:=
n
x ∈Rd :
x −x⋆(i)
k

2 < εk
o
,
and we have the following proposition.
Proposition 3.8. Assume that rk+1 is continuous in
xk in a neighborhood of an optimizer. Consider the op-
timization problem (3), which is only well-defined on the
(implicit) domain
{xk : rk+1(xk) > 0}.
As we have defined, x⋆(i)
k
is the optimal solution to (3)
for sample initialization i at time step k. By (6), we have
strict interiority at the optimum, namely rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
) >
0. Then the following conditions hold
(1) Neighborhood feasibility: There exists εk > 0 such
that
Bεk
 x⋆
k

⊆{xk : rk+1(xk) > 0},
i.e., a (relative) open neighborhood of x⋆
k remains
feasible.
(2) There exists ε′
k > 0 such that for all xk with ∥xk −
x⋆(i)
k
∥< ε′
k,
rk+1(xk) ⩾0.
Moreover, as is proved in Lemma 3.7, rk+1 is locally L-
Lipschitz near x⋆(i)
k
. Therefore, any
∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥⩽rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
)
L
=⇒rk+1(xk) ⩾0,
yielding an explicit feasibility radius in the state space.
Proof. Let β := rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
) > 0. By continuity of rk+1
at x⋆(i)
k
, there exists εk > 0 such that
∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥< εk =⇒
rk+1(xk) −β
 < β
2 .
Hence
for
all
xk
in
this
neighborhood
we
have
rk+1(xk) > β/2 > 0, which proves item (1) and natu-
rally leads to item (2) with some ε′
k ⩽εk.
For the Lipschitz claim, by Lemma 3.7 we have
rk+1(xk,1) −rk+1(xk,2)
 ⩽L∥xk,1 −xk,2∥
locally.
Then
∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥⩽β
L =⇒
rk+1(xk) ⩾rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
) −L · β
L = 0,
which establishes the explicit feasibility radius.
Remark (On boundary optimizers in state space). If an
optimizer of (3) happens to satisfy rk+1(x⋆
k) = 0 (a
boundary point), the neighborhood property above gen-
erally fails and arbitrarily small perturbations of x⋆(i)
k
may violate feasibility. In practice, one enforces a posi-
tive safety margin by requiring a termination condition
rk+1 ⩾β > 0 (“back-off”), or by appropriately schedul-
ing the barrier parameter τ.
We then obtain the following corollary.
Corollary 3.9 (Open neighborhood of feasible state
sequences). Let X⋆(i) := (x⋆(i)
0
, . . . , x⋆(i)
N ) be the op-
timal closed-loop state sequence by (3) such that each
x⋆(i)
k
, 0 ⩽k ⩽N, is interior feasible in the sense of
Proposition 3.8. Then there exists a positive sequence
(ε′
0, . . . , ε′
N) such that the set
X(i) :=
n
X(i) = (x(i)
0 , . . . , x(i)
N )

∥x(i)
k −x⋆(i)
k
∥< ε′
k, 0 ⩽k ⩽N
o
is a nonempty open subset of R(N+1)nx. In particular,
X(i) is an open neighborhood of the nominal state se-
quence X⋆(i) in the trajectory space.
Proposition 3.8 guarantees that, at each time step k,
there exists an open ball around the nominal state x⋆(i)
k
on which the local safety condition rk+1(xk) ⩾0 is sat-
isfied. Taking the Cartesian product of these per-stage
neighborhoods yields the open set X(i) in Corollary 3.9,
which is an open neighborhood of the nominal closed-
loop state sequence in R(N+1)nx.
Concluding the previous results of this section, we have
the following theorem.
Theorem 3.10. The set of reachable safe state se-
quences, namely X r, can be covered by these finitely
many open sets, i.e.,
X r ⊂
m
[
i=1
X(i),
with m being sufficiently large.
Proof. By construction, for every reachable safe state
sequence X⋆(i) = (x⋆(i)
0
, . . . , x⋆(i)
N ) ∈X r, there ex-
ists a nonempty open neighborhood X(X⋆(i)) such
that X⋆(i)
∈X(X⋆(i)) ⊂X r. Hence, the family
{X(X⋆(i))}X⋆(i)∈X r forms an open cover of X r. Since
X r is compact, the Heine–Borel theorem (see e.g. [78])
implies that this open cover admits a finite subcover.
Therefore, there exist trajectories
X⋆(1), . . . , X⋆(m0) ∈X r
6


such that
X r ⊂
m0
[
i=1
X
 X⋆(i)
.
For any m ⩾m0, we may add further sampled trajecto-
ries and corresponding open sets without affecting this
inclusion, so the statement holds for all sufficiently large
m.
Remark. Theorem 3.10 shows that, under the proposed
algorithm, the inferred system states and control in-
puts remain feasible for any test initial condition x(0) ∈
Xr(0), provided that the neural control policy is trained
on a finite number of data samples.
Although several efforts have been made to empirically
improve the feasibility of DPCs from a probabilistic per-
spective, the results in this section constitute, to the best
of our knowledge, the first rigorous attempt to prove
strict feasibility of both state and control outputs gen-
erated by neural controllers. In particular, we show that
strict feasibility of the learning-based controller can be
ensured using only a finite number of training samples,
which appears to be the first result of this kind in the
literature on white-box learning-based control.
In addition, we could also prove the following theorem.
Theorem 3.11. With the increase of the number of
training data samples m, the probability of inferred con-
trols and the corresponding states to violate the feasibil-
ity conditions is non-increasing and converges to 0 with
a finite m.
Proof. Define the m-dependent subset of guaranteed fea-
sible closed-loop state sequences
X (m)
feas :=
m
[
i=1
X(i) ⊂X r.
By construction (local feasibility around each nominal
trajectory and continuity of the closed-loop dynamics
and constraints), for every X ∈X (m)
feas the inferred con-
trol inputs and the corresponding state sequence satisfy
all feasibility constraints. Hence any constraint violation
can only occur for state sequences in the complement
V(m) := X r \ X (m)
feas,
where “\” denotes the set-difference operator. Let χ be a
probability measure on X r describing the distribution of
(reference) closed-loop state sequences induced by ran-
dom initial conditions x0 ∈Xr(0). Define
pm := P{violation of feasibility with m training samples}.
From the above discussion, any violation must corre-
spond to a trajectory in V(m), and therefore
pm ⩽χ
 V(m)
= χ
 X r \ X (m)
feas

.
(9)
As m increases, we only add more open sets to the union,
hence
X (m)
feas =
m
[
i=1
X(i) ⊆
m+1
[
i=1
X(i) = X (m+1)
feas
.
Therefore the complements form a nested decreasing se-
quence,
V(m+1) = X r \ X (m+1)
feas
⊆X r \ X (m)
feas = V(m).
Since χ is a probability measure, this implies
χ
 V(m+1)
≤χ
 V(m)
,
and by (9) we obtain
pm+1 ⩽pm,
∀m ∈N.
Hence the violation probability pm is non-increasing in
m.
By Proposition 3.10, the compact set X r can be covered
by finitely many of these open neighborhoods, i.e., there
exists an integer m0 ∈N and trajectories
X⋆(1), . . . , X⋆(m0) ∈X r
such that
X r ⊂
m0
[
i=1
X
 X⋆(i)
.
If the training set contains at least these m0 trajectories
(for example, by actively designing the training data to
realize this finite subcover), then for any m ⩾m0 we
have
X (m)
feas ⊃
m0
[
i=1
X
 X⋆(i)
⊃X r,
and therefore
V(m) = X r \ X (m)
feas = ∅,
m ⩾m0.
Consequently, χ
 V(m)
= 0 for all m ⩾m0, and by (9)
we obtain
pm = 0,
∀m ⩾m0.
Combining the two steps, we have shown that the se-
quence {pm}m∈N is non-increasing and, moreover, be-
comes identically zero for all m larger than some finite
7


threshold m0. Equivalently, the probability that the in-
ferred controls and the corresponding state trajectories
violate the feasibility conditions is non-increasing in m
and converges to zero in a finite number of steps.
Remark. Theorem 3.11 shows that each training sample
(assumed to satisfy the CBF condition) in the optimiza-
tion problem (3) contributes positively to the learned
DPC policy in a topological sense. In most existing DPC
results, this property is largely taken for granted and
justified only empirically; Theorem 3.11 provides a for-
mal proof of this intuitive idea. At present, the theorem
is an existence result, and it motivates us to seek con-
structive proofs that can directly guide the training of
DPC, its variants, and other white-box learning-based
controllers from a topological and geometric perspective
inspired by Theorem 3.11.
One would naturally think about how to determine the
number of data samples required for training, in the aim
of guaranteeing the exact feasibility. In the following part
of this section, we will investigate into this problem and
propose preliminary solutions.
Lemma 3.12 (Explicit feasibility radius). Let Assump-
tions 3.1–3.4 hold, and let X⋆(i) be a training trajec-
tory satisfying the strict CBF condition rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
) > 0,
k ∈{0, . . . , N −1}. Suppose that each rk+1 is Lips-
chitz continuous on a neighborhood of x⋆(i)
k
with con-
stant Lk > 0, and define the uniform Lipschitz constant
L := maxk=0,...,N−1 Lk. Then, for every
xk ∈Bϵ(i)
k (x⋆(i)
k
),
ϵ(i)
k
= rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
)
L
,
(10)
provided this ball is contained in the corresponding Lip-
schitz neighborhood, the one-step CBF condition satis-
fies rk+1(xk) ⩾0. Consequently, the learned policy pre-
serves one-step state feasibility within the Euclidean ball
Bϵ(i)
k (x⋆(i)
k
) with radius ϵ(i)
k .
Proof. By Lipschitz continuity of rk+1, for any xk in the
considered neighborhood,
|rk+1(xk) −rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
)| ≤Lk∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥.
Since L ⩾Lk, the radius ϵ(i)
k
=
rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
)
L
is a con-
servative lower bound on the local feasibility radius.
Hence, if ∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥≤ϵ(i)
k , then Lk∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥≤
L∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥≤rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
). Therefore,
rk+1(xk) ≥rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
) −Lk∥xk −x⋆(i)
k
∥⩾0.
Thus, every state in Bϵ(i)
k (x⋆(i)
k
) satisfies the one-step
CBF condition under the learned policy
Bϵ(i)
k (x⋆(i)
k
) ⊆{xk : rk+1(xk) ⩾0}.
If, in addition, the ball is restricted to the reachable set
at time k, then
Bϵ(i)
k (x⋆(i)
k
) ∩R(k) ⊆Xr(k).
Proposition 3.13 (Maximal required sample size).
Given that there exists a set of m0 closed-loop trajecto-
ries in the training set, which satisfy that the feasibility
balls Bϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

(with conservative radii ϵ(i)
k
defined
in (10)) cover the reachable safe set Xr(k) for each time
step k. Then, m0 constitutes the maximal number of
training samples necessarily required to guarantee exact
feasibility.
Proof. The proof follows from the compactness of Xr(k)
and the conservative nature of the feasibility radius de-
rived in Lemma 3.12.
By assumption, the union of the m0 feasibility balls (con-
structed using the derived radii) fully covers the safe set
Xr(k) ⊆
m0
[
i=1
Bϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

.
(11)
Crucially, the feasibility radius ϵ(i)
k
in (10) is computed
using the uniform Lipschitz coefficient L, which repre-
sents the global worst-case sensitivity. Therefore, ϵ(i)
k
serves as a conservative lower bound (minimum value)
for the true localized feasibility radius. The actual feasi-
bility region induced by a sample x⋆(i)
k
is geometrically
larger than or equal to the conservative ball Bϵ(i)
k . This
leads to the following inclusion
Bϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

⊆B¯ϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

,
(12)
where ¯ϵ(i)
k
denotes the radii of the true feasible ball
around the sample.
Consequently, the union of the actual feasibility regions
forms a superset of the conservative cover
m0
[
i=1
B¯ϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

⊇
m0
[
i=1
Bϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

⊇Xr(k).
(13)
This inclusion confirms that m0 samples are strictly suf-
ficient. Moreover, since m0 is determined based on the
8


conservative (minimum) radii, the number of samples re-
quired under the actual (larger) feasibility regions would
effectively be smaller. Thus, m0 serves as a conserva-
tive upper bound, representing the maximal number of
samples necessarily required for the feasibility guaran-
tee.
In Figure 2, we give a visualization and conclusion of the
core ideas of the previous theoretical results.
Fig. 2. Illustration of the feasibility analysis for DPC in a
two-dimensional state space. Each training trajectory gener-
ated by self-supervised learning of DPC induces a strictly fea-
sible local neighborhood around the nominal state sequence.
The size of this neighborhood is determined by the feasibility
margin rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
) and the local Lipschitz constant L, yield-
ing the conservative feasibility radius ϵ(i)
k
= rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
)/L.
As additional training trajectories are introduced, these local
feasible regions collectively form a finite cover of the reach-
able safe set Xr(k), implying that exact feasibility can be
guaranteed through offline training without requiring online
optimization.
4
CBF-proxy DPC via a Warm-Started Homo-
topy Training Scheme for Feasibility Guaran-
tee
Leveraging the differentiable architecture of the DPC,
the previous analyses derived rigorous feasibility guar-
antees predicated on the assumption that the CBF up-
date condition (6) is strictly satisfied across the training
dataset. Although optimizing (4) via soft penalties (e.g.
ReLU [29]) implicitly guides the closed-loop trajectories
toward the safe set, guaranteeing exact topological feasi-
bility requires the explicit mathematical enforcement of
(6). To systematically ensure strict interiority with re-
spect to the feasibility constraints, we propose an offline
CBF-based proxy filtering scheme. The resulting synthe-
sized controller is referred to as the CBF-proxy DPC.
Moreover, as we have mentioned in the preceding sec-
tions, directly training a neural controller with strict
barrier functions (e.g., logarithmic barriers) is notori-
ously challenging due to numerical brittleness when ini-
tialized outside the safe set, due to which soft penalties
are mostly used for feasibility. To overcome this, we pro-
pose a two-stage homotopy training scheme. This scheme
combines the broad optimization shaping of soft penal-
ties (e.g., ReLU and GeLU) during a warm-start phase
with the strict enforcement of hard constraints via an of-
fline control barrier function (CBF) safety proxy during
fine-tuning.
Stage 1: Warm-start via soft penalties
In the first stage, we train the policy network W by
minimizing the standard DPC loss LNC defined in (4).
Here, the constraint violations are penalized using a soft
hinge-style function. This allows the neural controller to
efficiently explore the state space and quickly converge
to a nominally feasible and optimal trajectory manifold,
avoiding the singularities of barrier methods.
Let the state sequence generated by this warm-started
neural controller be denoted as the nominal state se-
quence ˘x(i)
k , for each sample initialization i.
Stage 2: Offline CBF-proxy fine-tuning
To strictly enforce feasibility without relying on com-
putationally expensive online optimization (e.g., online
safety filters via quadratic programming (QP)) and pro-
vide feasibility guarantees in an offline manner for the
system trajectory of each sample i, we introduce a sub-
sequent offline fine-tuning stage.
For a given control input u(i)
k
generated by the neural
controller for sample i, we define the CBF residual aug-
mented with a non-negative slack variable δ(i)
k,l ⩾0:
rk+1,l(x(i)
k ) :=hl

F(x(i)
k , u(i)
k ), phk+1

−(1 −η)hl

x(i)
k , phk

+ δ(i)
k,l.
The slack δ(i)
k,l softens the strict condition (6) during early
iterations of fine-tuning, preserving numerical feasibil-
ity. When (6) is fully satisfied, δ(i)
k,l = 0; otherwise, it
quantifies the temporary dynamic violation.
9


To embed this mechanism seamlessly into the offline neu-
ral network training, we formulate the CBF-proxy loss:
LCBF (xk, uk, rk)
:=
m
X
i=1
N−1
X
k=0

∥x(i)
k (W) −˘x(i)
k ∥2
2 + ρ

δ(i)
k,l
2
−τ
nh
X
l=1
log
 rk+1,l(x(i)
k (W)(i)
k,l)

.
(14)
This loss acts as a differentiable, offline analog to a safety
filter QP. The first term tracks the optimal nominal tra-
jectory ˘x(i)
k
obtained from Stage 1. The weight ρ > 0
heavily penalizes the slack, making δ(i)
k,l > 0 a last re-
sort. Finally, instead of modifying the CBF itself, the
log-barrier term is applied strictly to the residual rk+1,l.
This biases the learned policy toward the strict interior
of the control invariant set over time, alleviating the brit-
tleness of pure penalty methods.
The network parameters W and the auxiliary slacks are
then fine-tuned via the following optimization performed
entirely offline
min
W, δ(i)
k,l≥0
LNC(xk, uk, rk) + LCBF (xk, uk, rk),
(15)
subject to the system dynamics and operational con-
straints (3b) to (3f). By performing Stage 2, δ(i)
k,l = 0
serves as a certificate of feasibility satisfaction for the
lth constraint on system states, considering sample i at
time step k.
In contrast to the state constraints, the feasibility of the
control inputs can be guaranteed a prior by the network
architecture, which is a less challenging task. Specifically,
strict satisfaction of the input bounds is enforced by
applying a saturating activation function paired with
an affine transformation (e.g., a normalized hyperbolic
tangent mapping) at the final layer of the neural policy,
thereby mathematically confining the generated control
inputs to the admissible region.
Based on the previous results of this section, we are
now able to construct a DPC with CBF-proxy loss for
ODE, of which an algorithm is given in Algorithm 1.
CBF-proxy DPC successfully bridges the gap between
soft neural training and strict deterministic safety. It is
worth noting that, for the proposed CBF-proxy DPC
scheme, we do not require any online optimizer to ad-
just the inferred control inputs. Such online “safety fil-
tering” mechanisms are typically introduced to enforce
the feasibility of the inferred control actions, but they
may undermine the main advantages of learning-based
controllers, namely their fast inference and trajectory-
wise optimality.
Algorithm 1 Training of CBF-proxy DPC
Input: The prediction horizon N; the system dynamics
(3b); the feasible state and control conditions (3d),
(3e); maximum training epochs E1 and E2.
1: Sample m initial system states x(i)
0 , 1 ⩽i ⩽m
Stage 1: Warm-start via soft penalties
2: e ←0
3: while e < E1 do
4:
Update the policy weights W for one epoch by
minimizing the cost function LNC(xk, uk, rk) (4)
5:
e ←e + 1
6: end while
Stage 2: CBF-proxy fine-tuning
7: e ←0
8: while e < E2 do
9:
Update the policy weights W for one epoch
by minimizing the cost function LNC(xk, uk, rk) +
LCBF (xk, uk, rk) (14)
10:
Check the satisfaction of feasibility l, namely δ(i)
k,l
for sample i at time step k
11:
if δ(i)
k,l = 0 for all i, k, l then
12:
break
▷Early stopping if strict safety
constraints are satisfied
13:
end if
14:
e ←e + 1
15: end while
We would also like to emphasize that the offline train-
ing with CBF-proxy loss serves two purposes. First, it
improves the feasibility of the control actions inferred
at the training samples. Second, it allows us to identify,
for each data sample i and constraint l at time step k,
whether feasibility is ensured, i.e., whether δi∗
k,l = 0. We
then have the following proposition.
Proposition
4.1
(Deterministic
closed-loop
feasi-
bility). Let Assumptions 3.1–3.4 hold. Let Dm
=
{X⋆(i)}m
i=1 be a finite dataset of m training trajecto-
ries generated by Algorithm 1. Suppose that after the
offline CBF-proxy fine-tuning (Stage 2), the optimal
slack variables satisfy δ(i)∗
k,l
= 0, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , m}, ∀k ∈
{0, . . . , N −1}, ∀l ∈{1, . . . , nh}, thereby ensuring strict
one-step interior feasibility rk+1,l(x⋆(i)
k
) > 0. If the
training dataset Dm is sufficiently dense such that the
induced open feasibility balls cover the reachable safe set
at each time step k, i.e.,
Xr(k) ⊆
m
[
i=1
Bϵ(i)
k

x⋆(i)
k

,
∀k ∈{0, . . . , N}
where the conservative local feasibility radius is given by
ϵ(i)
k
=
rk+1(x⋆(i)
k
)
L
with the uniform Lipschitz constant L
defined in (8), then the learned DPC policy πW(xk, ξk)
is recursively feasible by design.
Consequently, for any initial state x0
∈
Xr(0),
every closed-loop trajectory generated by the ex-
10


plicit policy satisfies the state and input constraints
deterministically
for
all
execution
steps,
namely,
hl(xk, phk) ⩾0
and
g(uk, pgk) ⩾0,
∀k ⩾0, with-
out requiring online optimization or a posteriori safety
filtering.
Remark. Well-distributed samples are essential to the
proposed framework. Related work includes recent
feasible-set sampling methods for MPC, such as the LP-
based Hit-and-Run approach [79]. Establishing explicit
theoretical guarantees, including sample-complexity
bounds and covering-number analyses, remains an im-
portant direction for future research.
5
Exact Feasibility by DPC: A Perspective
While the theoretical results presented in the preceding
sections primarily serve as existence proofs, they unveil
a fundamental shift in the certification of learning-
based control systems. In the existing literature, safe
learning-based control predominantly addresses feasi-
bility through a probabilistic lens, often relying on con-
centration inequalities, statistical confidence bounds, or
chance-constrained formulations. Such methodologies
conventionally treat the system dynamics merely as a
generative environment for empirical validation, yield-
ing guarantees that hold only with high probability. In
contrast, the proposed CBF-proxy DPC framework ex-
ploits the explicit white-box structure intrinsic to DPC,
effectively transitioning the validation paradigm from
stochastic approximation to deterministic topological
certification. By proving that strict feasibility can be en-
sured uniformly across all admissible trajectories using
only a finite number of training samples, we establish a
rigorous deterministic foundation that is largely absent
in contemporary learning-based control.
This deterministic guarantee necessitates a philosophi-
cal reinterpretation of the training dataset. In standard
supervised or reinforcement learning paradigms, an in-
crease in data volume primarily correlates with a re-
duction in expected empirical risk. However, under the
proposed topological framework, data samples acquire
a rigorous geometric interpretation. As demonstrated in
Section 3, each training trajectory that strictly satisfies
the feasibility condition induces a localized safety certifi-
cate, mathematically formalized as an open Euclidean
ball within the state space. By invoking the compactness
of the reachable safe set and the Heine-Borel theorem,
we establish that a finite subcover of these localized cer-
tificates is sufficient to tile the entire solution manifold.
Consequently, the concept of sample efficiency is rede-
fined: the algorithmic objective is no longer to asymp-
totically approximate an underlying probability distri-
bution, but rather to identify a finite set of geometric
anchors that deterministically cover a compact space.
Central to this topological certification is the fundamen-
tal dual role of the system dynamics. Black-box rein-
forcement learning algorithms typically restrict the role
of the environment to that of a forward simulator, pro-
viding state transitions and reward signals while obscur-
ing the underlying mathematical structure. Conversely,
DPC’s differentiable architecture grants direct analyt-
ical access to the system Jacobians, thereby facilitat-
ing a precise derivation of the solution manifold’s Lips-
chitz properties. This mathematical transparency allows
for the explicit quantification of the localized feasibility
radii and, by extension, the maximal necessary sample
complexity required to ensure strict feasibility. Thus, the
system dynamics transcend their conventional utility as
a mere trajectory generator; their intrinsic structural
properties are actively harvested to provide a determin-
istic safety certification that remains fundamentally in-
accessible to model-free methodologies.
Although the current findings establish a critical exis-
tence proof—demonstrating that the probability of con-
straint violation converges to zero given a finite num-
ber of suitably distributed training samples—they si-
multaneously illuminate a constructive pathway for fu-
ture algorithmic design. Recognizing that the conser-
vative feasibility radii furnish a strict upper bound on
the necessary sample size, future research must pivot to-
ward topology- and geometry-guided active sampling.
Rather than relying on uniform or random data genera-
tion, tailored sampling algorithms could be synthesized
for specific classes of system dynamics. Such algorithms
would strategically identify and prioritize training sam-
ples capable of covering maximal subsets of the reach-
able space, thereby achieving exact feasibility with an
optimally minimal dataset.
Ultimately, the profound significance of DPC extends
far beyond its well-documented computational advan-
tages over implicit MPC in real-time applications. By
seamlessly integrating an explicit, white-box dynami-
cal model within a differentiable neural policy frame-
work, DPC uniquely bridges the critical chasm between
rapid learning-based inference and rigorous, determinis-
tic safety certification. It elevates the neural controller
from a statistically approximate heuristic to a topolog-
ically certifiable operator. Consequently, this paradigm
not only substantiates the deployment of learning-based
predictive control in stringent, safety-critical environ-
ments but also establishes a foundational theoretical in-
tersection where finite data sampling, system geometry,
and classical control theory converge to yield exact, un-
compromised feasibility.
6
Numerical results
In this section, we apply the proposed CBF-proxy DPC
algorithm to three problems for validating our theoreti-
cal observations in the previous sections and the perfor-
mance of our proposed algorithms.
11


6.1
Nonholonomic mobile robot navigation
We first propose to treat a nonholonomic mobile robot
navigation problem. The system represents a standard
unicycle model navigating through a 2D grid environ-
ment populated with static obstacles. Its kinematics are
described by the following system of ordinary differen-
tial equations
˙xt = vt cos(θt)
˙yt = vt sin(θt)
˙θt = ωt.
(16)
Here xt = [xt, yt, θt]⊤∈R3 is the state vector repre-
senting the 2D spatial coordinates and heading angle of
the robot, ut = [vt, ωt]⊤∈R2 is the control input com-
prising the linear and angular velocities, respectively. In
each case, a random map is generated, and the robot
must navigate from a start position (0.5, 0.5) with an ini-
tial heading of π/4 to the goal (9.5, 9.5) over a horizon of
T = 120 time steps (∆t = 0.4s). The safety parameters
are selected as η = 0.1, ρ = 50, and τ = 0.05.
For digital implementation, this continuous-time model
is discretized. The deterministic drift component is in-
tegrated using a forward Euler method with a sampling
time of ∆t = 0.4 s, yielding a nominal discrete-time map
F(xk, uk). The prediction and control horizon is set to
N = 120 steps. The operating environment is configured
as a 10 × 10 spatial grid map, where an obstacle ratio of
10% is maintained by randomly assigning static obsta-
cles. The side length of each grid is 1.
The training process of the CBF-proxy DPC is struc-
tured into two distinct stages. We first train the base
DPC policy for 800 epochs to establish fundamental
goal-reaching and obstacle-avoidance behaviors. This
stage minimizes a composite hinge-loss cost function
penalizing distance to the target, boundary violations,
obstacle collisions, and control effort. Upon convergence
of this nominal control policy, we further fine-tune the
network for 200 epochs using the DPC loss together
with the safety-proxy loss to strictly improve the safety
feasibility of the trajectories. Specifically, we enforce
a discrete-time CBF residual condition with η = 0.1.
During this second stage, the optimization explicitly
penalizes the slack variable with a quadratic weight of
ρ = 50.0 and applies a logarithmic barrier function with
a weight of τ = 0.05 to push the residual rk+1 away
from zero.
The control policy is parameterized by a multi-layer per-
ceptron (MLP) featuring an encoder with three hidden
layers of 512, 256, and 128 neurons, utilizing GeLU acti-
vation functions. The network branches into two output
heads to simultaneously predict the control sequence u
and the relaxation variables δ. To train the policy, we
construct a dataset of Ns = 100, 200, 400, 600, 800, 1000
randomly generated environments. The parameters of
the neural policy are optimized using the Adam opti-
mizer with a learning rate of 10−3 and a batch size of 64.
The key benefit of this formulation is that it is fully dif-
ferentiable, enabling the use of automatic differentiation
over the unrolled unicycle dynamics to directly compute
the policy gradients. Finally, to rigorously evaluate the
safety guarantees, the trained policy is subjected to a
statistical performance test across 1000 unseen environ-
ment configurations to quantify the empirical collision
rate.
Fig. 3. Six sample trajectories of the mobile robot navigation
inferred by the proposed CBF-proxy DPC algorithm.
For evaluation, we conduct statistical tests over 1000 in-
dependent test environment cases. At every time step
along these trajectories, we check whether the state vio-
lates the constraints (namely violates the obstacle con-
straints) and then report the pointwise violation ratio
over all state samples and the fraction of trajectories that
exhibit at least one violation. Resulting curves for the
pointwise violation ratios and trajectory violation ratios
versus the number of training data samples are plotted
in Figure 4 and Figure 5 respectively. We note that both
curves decrease monotonically with the increase of the
number of the training data samples, which converge
to zero when 1000 samples are used for training. These
results are consistent with theoretical results in Theo-
rem 3.11, providing empirical validation of the theorem.
6.2
Unstable linear system stabilization
To evaluate the proposed algorithm on a more chal-
lenging regulation task, we consider the stabilization of
an open-loop unstable continuous-time linear system.
Specifically, we investigate a single-input underactuated
system governed by the following dynamics
˙x(t) = Ax(t) + Bu(t)
(17)
where x(t) ∈R2 is the state vector and u(t) ∈R is the
scalar control input. The entries of both the state ma-
12


Fig. 4. The figure of total violation points versus the number
of training data samples. The ratio decreases monotonically
with the increase of the training data samples.
Fig. 5. The figure of trajectory violation ratio versus the
number of training data samples.
trix A ∈R2×2 and the input matrix B ∈R2×1 are ran-
domly sampled from a standard normal distribution. To
strictly enforce open-loop instability, the randomly ini-
tialized state matrix A is subsequently shifted, if neces-
sary, to ensure that the real part of its maximum eigen-
value is strictly greater than 0.2. Meanwhile, the ran-
domly generated input matrix B, which maps the scalar
control input into the state derivative space, yields a non-
trivial, coupled underactuated configuration. To guar-
antee exact reproducibility of these randomized system
dynamics, a fixed random seed is employed throughout
the numerical experiments. For digital implementation
and offline training, the continuous-time dynamics are
discretized using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta (RK4) in-
tegrator with a sampling time of 0.05 s.
The control objective is to stabilize the system to the
origin while strictly adhering to hard physical con-
straints. Specifically, the actuator control input is
strictly bounded within uk ∈[−20, 20], and the safe
feasible region is defined as a bounded hypercube in the
state space, xk ∈[−16, 16]2.
The neural control policy is parameterized by an MLP
architecture featuring two hidden layers with 64 neurons
each and GeLU activation functions. To structurally
guarantee that the inferred control actions never violate
the actuator limits, the output layer of the network is
explicitly bounded. The neural policy is trained offline
using a dataset of 50, 75, 100, 200, 300 initial conditions
sampled uniformly from a localized region of [−2, 2]2 re-
spectively. The optimization objective is formulated as a
composite loss function comprising a standard quadratic
regulation cost with a state weight of 10 and a control
weight of 0.1, alongside a heavy terminal penalty of 100
to enforce asymptotic convergence. Furthermore, to em-
bed safety specifications during the unrolled trajectory
optimization, a ReLU-based soft penalty is formulated;
this penalty activates whenever the predicted states ap-
proach within a predefined margin of 1.0 from the hard
state boundaries.
Training a neural policy over long prediction horizons
for unstable dynamics typically suffers from the explod-
ing gradient problem. To systematically mitigate this
and ensure strict safety, the training procedure employs
a two-stage strategy. In the warm-up training stage, the
network focuses on driving the system to the origin with-
out the safety-proxy loss active. This stage uses a cur-
riculum learning approach where the prediction hori-
zon is progressively expanded from a short horizon of
10 steps up to 200 steps. The network parameters are
updated using the AdamW optimizer, with the learning
rate decaying from 5 × 10−3 to 1 × 10−3 as the horizon
extends. In the second stage, the network is trained by
both DPC and safety-proxy losses for 100 epochs over a
fixed maximum prediction horizon of 200 steps. During
this phase, the safety-proxy loss is activated to push tra-
jectories safely away from the hard boundaries, and the
learning rate is further reduced to 5 × 10−4. This two-
stage mechanism enables the neural controller to first
learn fundamental stabilization maneuvers before mas-
tering long-term constraint satisfaction and asymptotic
regulation.
To empirically validate the topological feasibility and
stabilization guarantees, closed-loop Monte-Carlo simu-
lations were conducted post-training. The learned poli-
cies were evaluated on 1000 independent, randomly gen-
erated initial conditions drawn from the initial state re-
gion. Each scenario was simulated for 1000 time steps
(with a sampling time of Ts = 0.05s), corresponding to
50s of closed-loop operation. Figure 6 and Figure 8 show
the phase portraits of 1000 randomly initialized test sam-
ples with the CBF-proxy DPC trained by 50 and 100
training samples respectively. Figure 7 and Figure 9 show
the state trajectories and control inputs corresponding
to 50 and 100 training samples. As illustrated in Figure
10, the constraint violation rate among test trajectories
decreases monotonically, ultimately converging to zero
as the training dataset size reaches 100. Furthermore, the
proposed CBF-proxy DPC exhibits a significantly lower
violation rate compared to the standard DPC baseline.
13


The numerical results confirm that the proposed
learning-based controllers succeeds in stabilizing the
divergent linear dynamics. Crucially, the empirical eval-
uation reveals that the constraint violation rate mono-
tonically decreases as the number of training samples
increases. As observed, while training with 50 samples
yields a 96.4% convergence rate with severe divergence
in uncovered regions in the reachable set, expanding
the dataset size effectively mitigates these edge cases,
actively corroborating our theoretical proofs. Further-
more, the ablation study results shown in Figure 10
justify the integration of the safety-proxy loss. Compar-
ative results demonstrate that fine-tuning the neural
policy with this safety-proxy loss essentially decreases
the ratio of violating the constraints. These findings
validate both the deterministic feasibility of the inferred
neural control sequences under sufficient data regimes
and the critical role of the safety-proxy loss in ensuring
strict constraint satisfaction.
Fig. 6. Phase trajectories of 1000 samples in the testing
dataset, which are initialized randomly. The CBF-proxy
DPC is trained by 50 data samples. By the proposed algo-
rithm, 96.4% of the testing samples are successfully stabi-
lized to the origin.
6.3
Constrained quadcopter system stabilization
In the following part of this section, we simulate
our algorithm on a 12-dimensional nonlinear quad-
copter system, a benchmark widely recognized for its
highly coupled, underactuated dynamics and stringent
safety requirements. The system state is defined as
x = [px, py, pz, ϕ, θ, ψ, ˙px, ˙py, ˙pz, ˙ϕ, ˙θ, ˙ψ]T ∈R12, com-
prising the 3D position, Euler angles (roll, pitch, yaw),
and their respective linear and angular velocities. The
control input u ∈R4 corresponds to the individual
thrust forces generated by the four rotors. Because the
quadcopter has six degrees of freedom but only four ac-
tuators, it is severely underactuated; any translational
motion in the horizontal plane (X-Y ) is intrinsically
coupled with the rotational dynamics (roll and pitch),
Fig. 7. State trajectories and control inputs of test data us-
ing 50 training samples. While 96.4% of the test trajectories
successfully converge to the origin, the remaining cases ex-
hibit severe divergence. This indicates that certain regions
of the reachable set remain uncovered by the feasible neigh-
borhoods of the training data.
Fig. 8. Phase trajectories of 1000 samples in the testing
dataset, which are initialized randomly. The CBF-proxy
DPC is trained by 100 data samples. By the proposed algo-
rithm, all testing samples are successfully stabilized to the
origin.
making constraint satisfaction uniquely challenging.
While the physical quadcopter is governed by complex
nonlinear equations (involving trigonometric couplings
and aerodynamic drag), we employ its widely-used
discrete-time linearized model around the hovering equi-
librium point (with a sampling time Ts = 0.1 s) for the
synthesis and evaluation of the predictive controllers.
This formulation not only provides a standardized
framework for fair performance benchmarking but also
mirrors standard practices in real-time model predictive
control.
The primary control objective is to stabilize the quad-
copter at a predefined hovering altitude (e.g., pz = 1.0
14


Fig. 9. State trajectories and control inputs of test data using
100 training samples, all of which converge to the origin.
Fig. 10. The ratio of test data violating constraints versus
the number of training data samples for CBF-proxy DPC
and vanilla DPC, respectively. We note that the violation
ratio is significantly smaller for the former one.
m, with zero tilt and zero velocity) from various initial
conditions, while strictly adhering to hard state con-
straints and actuator saturation. To maintain the va-
lidity of the small-angle approximation inherent in the
linearized model, strict attitude constraints are imposed
on the roll and pitch angles (ϕ, θ ∈[−π/6, π/6]), along-
side boundaries for the X and Z axes. Furthermore,
the control inputs are bounded by physical motor sat-
uration limits, u ∈[umin, umax], defined relative to the
nominal hovering thrust. Synthesizing a neural policy
that simultaneously guarantees asymptotic tracking and
strict constraint satisfaction under these coupled con-
ditions is notoriously challenging, particularly in data-
scarce regimes.
To empirically validate the data efficiency and safety ro-
bustness of the proposed framework, we benchmark our
CBF-proxy DPC against a standard DPC baseline. The
baseline is trained with a conventional soft-penalty loss
function, which superimposes a quadratic (LQR-type)
state tracking and control effort cost with ReLU-based
exterior penalty terms. We provide the phase portrait of
position X and altitude Z for 200 samples in the total
2000 with 16 training samples, in Figure 11. In Figure 13,
the closed-loop performance is quantitatively evaluated
using the trajectory violation ratio, defined as the pro-
portion of simulated trajectories that breach any state
or input constraints during the operational horizon. To
rigorously assess the sample efficiency and generaliza-
tion capability of the neural policies, this metric is evalu-
ated across severely constrained training datasets, rang-
ing from N = 6 to N = 16 initial state samples. The
monotonic decrease of the trajectory violation ratio with
the increase of the number of training data samples also
align with our theoretical observations.
Fig. 11. Phase trajectories of 200 in 2000 testing data sam-
ples, which are initialized randomly. The CBF-proxy DPC
is trained by 16 data samples. By the proposed algorithm,
all testing samples are successfully stabilized to the desired
state.
Fig. 12. State trajectories (Altitude Z and Position X) and
control inputs (Control Input u1) of test data using 16 train-
ing samples, which show successful stabilization for the 2000
testing samples.
15


Fig. 13. The ratio of test data violating constraints versus
the number of training data samples for CBF-proxy DPC
and standard DPC, respectively. We note that the violation
ratio is significantly smaller for the former one.
7
Conclusions
Learning-based control methods have demonstrated
promising results across various engineering domains, of-
fering significantly faster online computation times than
implicit MPC and making them highly attractive for
real-time implementation. However, the widespread de-
ployment of these learning mechanisms in safety-critical
systems remains severely hindered by the absence of
rigorous feasibility guarantees. In this paper, we estab-
lished a formal feasibility theory for DPC by leveraging
a novel topological analysis of the induced reachable
safe set. To realize this theoretical framework, we intro-
duced an offline policy learning strategy equipped with
a dedicated safety-proxy structure designed to strictly
enforce constraint satisfaction over the training data.
Crucially, we rigorously proved that the inferred neural
control sequences deterministically satisfy all feasibility
conditions, provided a finite number of training samples
are perfectly optimized to yield zero safety residuals of-
fline. Furthermore, we analytically demonstrated that as
the size of this strictly safe training dataset increases,
the probability of constraint violation by the inferred
policy monotonically decreases, ultimately converging to
zero within a finite sample limit. By deeply exploiting
the white-box nature of DPC, this work provides, to the
best of our knowledge, the first rigorous and determin-
istic feasibility guarantees for such architectures from a
topological perspective, offering a definitive structural
advantage over conventional black-box methods.
The theoretical findings in this paper establish funda-
mental existence-type guarantees regarding topological
feasibility and sample complexity. Transitioning from
these existence proofs to fully constructive bounds is a
natural progression of this research rather than a funda-
mental limitation. In future work, we intend to leverage
deeper geometric and topological insights into specific
classes of system dynamics to develop constructive algo-
rithms that explicitly enforce these theoretical feasibil-
ity limits a priori when training DPC offline.
References
[1]
D. Q. Mayne, J. B. Rawlings, C. V. Rao, and P. O. M.
Scokaert, “Constrained model predictive control: Stability
and optimality,” Automatica, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 789–814,
2000.
[2]
J. B. Rawlings, D. Q. Mayne, and M. Diehl, Model Predictive
Control: Theory, Computation, and Design. Nob Hill, 2 ed.,
2017.
[3]
F. Borrelli, A. Bemporad, and M. Morari, Predictive Control
for Linear and Hybrid Systems. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2017.
[4]
L. Grüne and J. Pannek, Nonlinear Model Predictive Control:
Theory and Algorithms.
Communications and Control
Engineering,
Cham,
Switzerland:
Springer
International
Publishing, 2 ed., 2017.
[5]
E. F. Camacho and C. Bordons, Model Predictive Control.
Springer, 2 ed., 2004.
[6]
D. Q. Mayne, “Model predictive control: Recent developments
and future promise,” Automatica, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2967–
2986, 2014.
[7]
D. Q. Mayne, M. M. Seron, and S. V. Raković, “Robust model
predictive control of constrained linear systems with bounded
disturbances,” Automatica, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 219–224, 2005.
[8]
M.
Lazar,
W.
P.
M.
H.
Heemels,
S.
Weiland,
and
A. Bemporad, “Stabilizing model predictive control of hybrid
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 51,
no. 11, pp. 1813–1818, 2006.
[9]
L. Zhang, S. Zhuang, and R. D. Braatz, “Switched model
predictive control of switched linear systems: Feasibility,
stability and robustness,” Automatica, vol. 67, pp. 8–21, 2016.
[10] M. Maiworm, T. Bäthge, and R. Findeisen, “Scenario-
based model predictive control: Recursive feasibility and
stability,”
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 8, pp. 50–
56, 2015.
9th IFAC Symposium on Advanced Control of
Chemical Processes ADCHEM 2015.
[11] A. Mesbah, “Stochastic model predictive control: An overview
and perspectives for future research,” IEEE Control Systems
Magazine, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 30–44, 2016.
[12] J. Köhler, R. Soloperto, M. A. Müller, and F. Allgöwer,
“A
computationally
efficient
robust
model
predictive
control framework for uncertain nonlinear systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 794–
801, 2021.
[13] M. Diehl, H. Bock, J. P. Schlöder, R. Findeisen, Z. Nagy,
and F. Allgöwer, “Real-time optimization and nonlinear
model predictive control of processes governed by differential-
algebraic equations,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 12,
no. 4, pp. 577–585, 2002.
[14] M. Diehl, H. J. Ferreau, and N. Haverbeke, Efficient
Numerical Methods for Nonlinear MPC and Moving Horizon
Estimation, pp. 391–417. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009.
[15] A. Domahidi, A. U. Zgraggen, M. N. Zeilinger, M. Morari,
and C. N. Jones, “Efficient interior point methods for
multistage problems arising in receding horizon control,” in
2012 IEEE 51st IEEE Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC), pp. 668–674, 2012.
16


[16] L. Wu and R. D. Braatz, “A direct optimization algorithm for
input-constrained mpc,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1366–1373, 2025.
[17] A. Bemporad, M. Morari, V. Dua, and E. N. Pistikopoulos,
“The explicit linear quadratic regulator for constrained
systems,” Automatica, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 3–20, 2002.
[18] M. N. Zeilinger, C. N. Jones, and M. Morari, “Real-time
suboptimal model predictive control using a combination of
explicit mpc and online optimization,” IEEE transactions on
automatic control, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1524–1534, 2011.
[19] M. Kvasnica and M. Fikar, “Clipping-based complexity
reduction in explicit mpc,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1878–1883, 2011.
[20] M.
Hertneck,
J.
Köhler,
S.
Trimpe,
and
F.
Allgöwer,
“Learning an approximate model predictive controller with
guarantees,” IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 2, no. 3,
pp. 543–548, 2018.
[21] B.
Karg
and
S.
Lucia,
“Efficient
representation
and
approximation of model predictive control laws via deep
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 9,
pp. 3866–3878, 2020.
[22] S. Chen, K. Saulnier, N. Atanasov, D. D. Lee, V. Kumar,
G. J. Pappas, and M. Morari, “Approximating explicit model
predictive control using constrained neural networks,” in 2018
Annual American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 1520–1527,
2018.
[23] M. Herceg, M. Kvasnica, C. N. Jones, and M. Morari,
“Multi-parametric toolbox 3.0,” in 2013 European Control
Conference (ECC), pp. 502–510, 2013.
[24] A. Bemporad, M. Morari, V. Dua, and E. Pistikopoulos,
“The
explicit
solution
of
model
predictive
control
via
multiparametric quadratic programming,” in Proceedings of
the 2000 American Control Conference. ACC (IEEE Cat.
No.00CH36334), vol. 2, pp. 872–876 vol.2, 2000.
[25] A. Alessio and A. Bemporad, A Survey on Explicit Model
Predictive Control, pp. 345–369. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2009.
[26] A.
Bemporad,
A.
Oliveri,
T.
Poggi,
and
M.
Storace,
“Ultra-fast stabilizing model predictive control via canonical
piecewise affine approximations,”
IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control, vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 2883–2897, 2011.
[27] C. N. Jones and M. Morari, “Polytopic approximation of
explicit model predictive controllers,” IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 2542–2553, 2010.
[28] A. Tokmak, C. Fiedler, M. N. Zeilinger, S. Trimpe, and
J. Köhler, “Automatic nonlinear mpc approximation with
closed-loop guarantees,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, 2025.
[29] J. Drgoňa, A. Tuor, and D. Vrabie, “Learning constrained
parametric differentiable predictive control policies with
guarantees,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 3596–3607, 2024.
[30] J. Drgoňa, K. Kiš, A. Tuor, D. Vrabie, and M. Klaučo,
“Differentiable predictive control: Deep learning alternative
to explicit model predictive control for unknown nonlinear
systems,” Journal of Process Control, vol. 116, pp. 80–92,
2022.
[31] L. Hewing, K. P. Wabersich, M. Menner, and M. N.
Zeilinger, “Learning-based model predictive control: Toward
safe learning in control,” Annual Review of Control, Robotics,
and Autonomous Systems, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 269–296, 2020.
[32] L. Brunke, M. Greeff, A. W. Hall, Z. Yuan, S. Zhou,
J. Panerati, and A. P. Schoellig, “Safe learning in robotics:
From learning-based control to safe reinforcement learning,”
Annual
Review
of
Control,
Robotics,
and
Autonomous
Systems, vol. 5, no. Volume 5, 2022, pp. 411–444, 2022.
[33] J. Drgoňa, T. X. Nghiem, T. Beckers, M. Fazlyab, E. Mallada,
C. Jones, D. Vrabie, S. L. Brunton, and R. Findeisen, “Safe
physics-informed machine learning for dynamics and control,”
in 2025 American Control Conference (ACC), pp. 591–606,
2025.
[34] A.
Lederer,
E.
Noorani,
J.
S.
Baras,
and
S.
Hirche,
“Risk-sensitive safety filters for reinforcement learning with
probabilistic guarantees,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, 2025.
[35] P. Mestres and J. Cortés, “Feasibility and regularity analysis
of safe stabilizing controllers under uncertainty,” Automatica,
vol. 167, p. 111800, 2024.
[36] F. Berkenkamp, M. Turchetta, A. Schoellig, and A. Krause,
“Safe
model-based
reinforcement
learning
with
stability
guarantees,”
Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[37] J. Garcıa and F. Fernández, “A comprehensive survey on
safe reinforcement learning,” Journal of Machine Learning
Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1437–1480, 2015.
[38] A. Aswani, H. Gonzalez, S. S. Sastry, and C. Tomlin,
“Provably safe and robust learning-based model predictive
control,” Automatica, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1216–1226, 2013.
[39] L. Hewing, J. Kabzan, and M. N. Zeilinger, “Cautious model
predictive control using gaussian process regression,” IEEE
Transactions on Control Systems Technology, vol. 28, no. 6,
pp. 2736–2743, 2020.
[40] T.
Koller,
F.
Berkenkamp,
M.
Turchetta,
and A. Krause, “Learning-based model predictive control for
safe exploration,” in 2018 IEEE conference on decision and
control (CDC), pp. 6059–6066, IEEE, 2018.
[41] U. Rosolia and F. Borrelli, “Learning model predictive control
for iterative tasks. a data-driven control framework,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 1883–
1896, 2018.
[42] J. Berberich, J. Köhler, M. A. Müller, and F. Allgöwer,
“Data-driven model predictive control with stability and
robustness guarantees,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 1702–1717, 2021.
[43] J. Coulson, J. Lygeros, and F. Dörfler, “Regularized and
distributionally robust data-enabled predictive control,” in
2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC),
pp. 2696–2701, 2019.
[44] M. Korda and I. Mezić, “Linear predictors for nonlinear
dynamical
systems:
Koopman
operator
meets
model
predictive control,” Automatica, vol. 93, pp. 149–160, 2018.
[45] K. P. Wabersich, A. J. Taylor, J. J. Choi, K. Sreenath, C. J.
Tomlin, A. D. Ames, and M. N. Zeilinger, “Data-driven safety
filters: Hamilton-jacobi reachability, control barrier functions,
and predictive methods for uncertain systems,” IEEE Control
Systems Magazine, vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 137–177, 2023.
[46] A. D. Ames, X. Xu, J. W. Grizzle, and P. Tabuada, “Control
barrier function based quadratic programs for safety critical
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 62,
no. 8, pp. 3861–3876, 2016.
[47] A. D. Ames, S. Coogan, M. Egerstedt, G. Notomista,
K. Sreenath, and P. Tabuada, “Control barrier functions:
Theory and applications,” in 2019 18th European control
conference (ECC), pp. 3420–3431, Ieee, 2019.
[48] L. Lindemann and D. V. Dimarogonas, “Control barrier
functions for signal temporal logic tasks,” IEEE Control
Systems Letters, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 96–101, 2019.
17


[49] W. Xiao, T.-H. Wang, R. Hasani, M. Chahine, A. Amini,
X.
Li,
and
D.
Rus,
“Barriernet:
Differentiable
control
barrier functions for learning of safe robot control,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 2289–2307, 2023.
[50] S. Yang, S. Chen, V. M. Preciado, and R. Mangharam,
“Differentiable safe controller design through control barrier
functions,” IEEE Control Systems Letters, vol. 7, pp. 1207–
1212, 2023.
[51] A. Didier and M. N. Zeilinger, “A multiobjective approach to
robust predictive control barrier functions for discrete-time
systems,” Automatica, vol. 189, p. 113009, 2026.
[52] J. F. Fisac, A. K. Akametalu, M. N. Zeilinger, S. Kaynama,
J. Gillula, and C. J. Tomlin, “A general safety framework for
learning-based control in uncertain robotic systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2737–
2752, 2019.
[53] J. H. Gillula, H. Huang, M. P. Vitus, and C. J. Tomlin,
“Design of guaranteed safe maneuvers using reachable sets:
Autonomous quadrotor aerobatics in theory and practice,”
in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pp. 1649–1654, 2010.
[54] S. Bansal, M. Chen, S. Herbert, and C. J. Tomlin, “Hamilton-
jacobi reachability: A brief overview and recent advances,” in
2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control
(CDC), pp. 2242–2253, 2017.
[55] K. P. Wabersich and M. N. Zeilinger, “A predictive safety
filter for learning-based control of constrained nonlinear
dynamical systems,” Automatica, vol. 129, p. 109597, 2021.
[56] A.
Leeman,
J.
Köhler,
S.
Bennani,
and
M.
Zeilinger,
“Predictive safety filter using system level synthesis,” in
Proceedings of The 5th Annual Learning for Dynamics and
Control Conference (N. Matni, M. Morari, and G. J. Pappas,
eds.), vol. 211 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pp. 1180–1192, PMLR, 15–16 Jun 2023.
[57] W. S. Cortez, J. Drgona, D. Vrabie, and M. Halappanavar,
“A robust, efficient predictive safety filter,” 2024.
[58] P.
Donti,
M.
Roderick,
M.
Fazlyab,
and
J.
Z.
Kolter, “Enforcing robust control guarantees within neural
network policies,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021.
[59] H.
Hose,
J.
Köhler,
M.
N.
Zeilinger,
and
S.
Trimpe,
“Approximate nonlinear model predictive control with safety-
augmented neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Control
Systems Technology, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2490–2497, 2025.
[60] Y. Chen, A. Singletary, and A. D. Ames, “Guaranteed
obstacle avoidance for multi-robot operations with limited
actuation:
A
control
barrier
function
approach,”
IEEE
Control Systems Letters, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 127–132, 2020.
[61] W. S. Cortez, J. Drgona, A. Tuor, M. Halappanavar, and
D. Vrabie, “Differentiable predictive control with safety
guarantees: A control barrier function approach,” in 2022
IEEE 61st Conference on Decision and Control (CDC),
pp. 932–938, IEEE, 2022.
[62] W. Xiao, T.-H. Wang, R. Hasani, M. Chahine, A. Amini,
X.
Li,
and
D.
Rus,
“Barriernet:
Differentiable
control
barrier functions for learning of safe robot control,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 2289–2307, 2023.
[63] X. Ding, H. Wang, Y. Ren, Y. Zheng, C. Chen, and J. He,
“Online control barrier function construction for safety-
critical motion control of manipulators,” IEEE Transactions
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 54, no. 8,
pp. 4761–4771, 2024.
[64] K. He, S. Shi, T. van den Boom, and B. De Schutter, “State-
action control barrier functions: Imposing safety on learning-
based control with low online computational costs,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 2025.
[65] A. Didier and M. N. Zeilinger, “Approximate predictive
control barrier function for discrete-time systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 2026.
[66] C. Liu, A. Alan, S. Shi, and B. De Schutter, “Robust
adaptive discrete-time control barrier certificate,”
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.08153, 2025.
[67] A.
Robey,
H.
Hu,
L.
Lindemann,
H.
Zhang,
D.
V.
Dimarogonas, S. Tu, and N. Matni, “Learning control barrier
functions from expert demonstrations,” in 2020 59th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 3717–3724,
2020.
[68] H. Chen and F. Allgöwer, “A quasi-infinite horizon nonlinear
model predictive control scheme with guaranteed stability,”
Automatica, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 1205–1217, 1998.
[69] D. Q. Mayne, J. B. Rawlings, C. V. Rao, and P. O. Scokaert,
“Survey constrained model predictive control: Stability and
optimality,” Automatica (Journal of IFAC), vol. 36, no. 6,
pp. 789–814, 2000.
[70] L. Fagiano and A. R. Teel, “Generalized terminal state
constraint for model predictive control,” Automatica, vol. 49,
no. 9, pp. 2622–2631, 2013.
[71] J. Köhler, M. A. Müller, and F. Allgöwer, “A nonlinear
model predictive control framework using reference generic
terminal ingredients,”
IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 3576–3583, 2019.
[72] M. Lee, “Mathematical analysis and performance evaluation
of the gelu activation function in deep learning,” Journal of
Mathematics, vol. 2023, no. 1, p. 4229924, 2023.
[73] S.
Boyd
and
L.
Vandenberghe,
Convex
optimization.
Cambridge university press, 2004.
[74] P. Werbos, “Backpropagation through time: what it does
and how to do it,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 78, no. 10,
pp. 1550–1560, 1990.
[75] G. Puskorius and L. Feldkamp, “Truncated backpropagation
through time and Kalman filter training for neurocontrol,”
in Proceedings of 1994 IEEE International Conference on
Neural Networks (ICNN’94), vol. 4, pp. 2488–2493, IEEE,
1994.
[76] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay
regularization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
[77] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury,
G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga,
et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[78] W. Rudin, Principles of Mathematical Analysis. McGraw–
Hill, 3rd ed., 1976.
[79] E. Milios, F. Berkel, F. Gruber, M. N. Zeilinger, and
K. P. Wabersich, “Efficient uniform feasible set sampling for
approximate linear mpc,” 2026.
18
