Title: Decentralized Scalable Exploration via Emergent Adaptive Lévy Walks on Minimal-Sensing Platforms

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.25195v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Jul 2026 00:23:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Decentralized Scalable Exploration via Emergent Adaptive L´ evy Walks on Minimal-Sensing Platforms 

Wai Lun Leong 1 and Teo Swee Huat Rodney 2

Abstract — Efficient autonomous exploration with palm-sized nano-UAVs remains challenging due to severe limitations in sensing, computation, and flight endurance. We present alightweight sensor-driven L´ evy walk (SDLW) controller for aerial robots weighing under 50 g equipped with sparse local sensing. The method combines discrete L´ evy step-length sam-pling with a sensor-reactive heading policy using directional range measurements. Each robot independently samples its L´ evy exponent from a uniform prior to diversify exploration without inter-robot communication for exploration control. Each robot then selects headings using a von Mises distribution that biases motion toward open directions while preserving superdiffusive exploration properties. The controller operates at constant computational cost, enabling scalable multi-UAV exploration. Simulation results show coverage improvements of 79.6% in open arenas, 43.1% in rooms-and-corridors layouts, and 13.6% in cluttered environments, with collision reductions of 13.0%, 7.1%, and 1.4% respectively, relative to a uniform-heading L´ evy walk baseline. This work provides a practical framework for scalable multi-robot exploration on minimal-sensing, resource-constrained nano-UAVs. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Palm-sized nano-UAVs offer a critical capability for time-sensitive search-and-rescue missions in hazardous post-disaster environments, such as structurally unstable build-ings, confined spaces with toxic atmospheres, or rubble-filled passages where human access is dangerous or impos-sible, yet autonomous exploration remains challenging due to severe constraints in onboard sensing, computation, and flight endurance. These constraints often rule out SLAM-centric or optimization-heavy planning. Recent work has demonstrated that lightweight SLAM can run onboard nano-UAVs using minimal time-of-flight (ToF) sensors and Cortex-M microcontrollers [1], [2], but such systems still require careful algorithm optimization; for missions where only coverage rather than detailed mapping is required, simpler reactive approaches remain attractive. In such regimes, re-active controllers that rely only on local measurements are appealing: they incur constant computational cost, avoid map maintenance, and maintain constant-time complexity with multiple agents without inter-robot communication. Among minimalist search processes, L´ evy walks provide a principled balance between short local probes and occasional long relo-cations via heavy-tailed step lengths that yield superdiffusive dispersion; the model and its broad relevance have been surveyed in depth in physics and biology [3]. Recent theory on the discrete two-dimensional grid Z2

shows that for parallel search there is an optimal expo-nent α ∈ (2 , 3) that depends on team size k and search                        

> Additional material including the open-source code is available at
> https://github.com/williamleong/sdlw .
> 1,2Wai Lun Leong and Teo Swee Huat Rodney are with the National University of Singapore, Singapore

{william.leong, tsltshr }@nus.edu.sg 

scale ℓ. Sampling each agent’s exponent independently and uniformly in (2 , 3) achieves near-optimal parallel search performance over wide ranges of k and ℓ (within polylog factors) . The same line of work formalizes the discrete L´ evy walk with integer jump distances distributed as P (d=0) = 1/2 and P (d=i) ∝ i−α for i ≥ 1 [4]. Preserving this discrete formulation helps keep execution lightweight while remaining aligned with theoretical guarantees. Translating these ideas to resource-constrained robots has taken several directions. One approach biases headings using 

a priori target densities, selecting directions from a von Mises distribution centered on the gradient ∇P of a known field; this bias improves search when a reliable prior exists, but it presupposes access to that prior, which nano-UAVs commonly lack [5]. A second approach designs information-correlated L´ evy walks in which each step’s heading max-imizes predicted mutual information with an occupancy map under construction; this improves mapping but requires maintaining a map and evaluating information gain at each step [6]. A third approach modifies L´ evy motion using potential fields for obstacle avoidance and inter-robot spacing [7]. Related work also explores reactive L´ evy-like dispersion without communication to speed up coverage, and collective L´ evy-walk mechanisms to preserve heavy-tailed properties at larger swarm sizes [8], [9]. 

Gap and Goal: We propose a fully reactive, map-free controller combining discrete L´ evy steps with sensor-driven von Mises heading selection. A sensor-weighted resultant from four directional ranges biases motion toward open space via an openness-to-concentration mapping, preserv-ing superdiffusion. The design requires O(1) computation, no inter-robot communication, and maintains constant-time complexity across team sizes. 

A. Problem Statement and Assumptions 

We consider a team of k palm-sized nano-UAVs tasked with coverage-oriented exploration of a bounded, cluttered 2-D domain. This work targets platforms such as the Bitcraze Crazyflie nano-UAV (mass around 27 g to 33 g ) [10], [11], which exemplifies the sub-50 g minimal-sensing constraint. In prior indoor exploration deployments, Crazyflie setups use a Multi-ranger deck for four directional distance readings and a Flow deck for optical-flow motion estimation [11]. 

Sensing. Each UAV acquires four directional distance mea-surements in its local frame (front, left, right, back) per con-trol cycle. This sparse sensing provides essential environmen-tal information while maintaining a minimal computational burden. Critically, there is no global localization, no map building, and no access to priors such as target distributions or occupancy models. Each agent must decide reactively, based exclusively on current local distance measurements. arXiv:2607.25195v1 [cs.RO] 28 Jul 2026 Computation. Onboard compute is severely constrained. All control updates must execute in constant time O(1) 

with kilobyte-scale memory. This rules out map maintenance, global optimization, and complex state estimation, placing strong emphasis on lightweight, reactive controllers. 

Communication and coordination. Search behavior is fully decentralized and does not rely on inter-robot communication for exploration control. Lightweight message passing may still be available for mission-critical events (e.g., safety or failsafe alerts), but it is not used for search decisions. This preserves scalable emergent multi-robot behavior while avoiding communication-dependent exploration logic. 

B. Contributions 

This work contributes: 1) Sensor-Driven L´ evy-Walk search controller for nano-UAVs. We propose a map-free, constant-time controller using only sparse local directional ranging to stochastically bias headings via von Mises distribution while executing discrete L´ evy steps. 2) Theory-informed exponent randomization. Follow-ing established results that α ∼ Uniform(2 , 3) yields near-optimal parallel search performance, we realize this strategy on minimal-sensing nano-UAVs. 3) Sensor-adaptive stochastic steering. We introduce an openness-to-κ mapping that adapts von Mises con-centration to local structure, preserving superdiffusive behavior while reducing collisions. 4) Comprehensive simulation evaluation. Evaluation across three arena types and five team sizes demon-strates 13%–65% coverage gains and 1%–29% colli-sion reduction relative to baseline; simulation code is released to enable reproducibility and further explo-ration. 5) Design for nano-UAV resource constraints. We pro-vide a constant-time implementation relying only on four directional readings and lightweight sampling suitable for sub-50 g platforms. 

C. Related Works 

Theory of L´ evy search. Clementi et al. establish that per-agent α ∼ Uniform(2 , 3) is near-optimal for parallel search on Z2 across unknown team sizes and scales. We adopt this result and validate its feasibility on resource-constrained platforms [4]. 

Biasing directions: prior fields vs. reactive sensing. 

Marthaler et al. bias headings using a known target-density gradient and a von Mises directional model, but their method requires priors [5]. Ramachandran et al. maximize mutual information for mapping, which requires maintaining a map and evaluating information gain each step [6]. Our reactive sensor-weighted von Mises achieves directional bias without priors or maps, suitable for constant-time nano-UAV control. 

Potential-field L´ evy hybrids and reactive dispersion. 

Works combining L´ evy motion with potential fields offer practical collision avoidance but rely on deterministic steer-ing. Our stochastic von Mises policy maintains controlled randomness tunable via κ, better preserving superdiffusive properties. Reactive L´ evy-like dispersion results support scalability without communication [7]–[9]. 

Minimal navigation for nano-UAV swarms. McGuire et al. demonstrate exploration with Crazyflie swarms using wall-following and RSSI-homing (SGBA), employing deter-ministic bug-algorithm steering [11]. Our work differs from this by using reactive stochastic heading selection throughout exploration, preserving L´ evy walk superdiffusive properties without return-to-home infrastructure, focusing on coverage-oriented search rather than outbound-return missions. The above approaches lack a fully reactive, map-free, minimal-sensing controller that simultaneously (i) preserves superdiffusive L´ evy properties, (ii) exploits per-agent ex-ponent randomization, and (iii) adapts heading reactively to local geometry in constant time. We address this gap by combining discrete L´ evy steps with a sensor-driven von Mises heading policy that biases motion toward open space while retaining controlled randomness. The controller requires no inter-robot communication and no shared map, enabling implicit cooperation through decentralized motion rather than explicit coordination. II. M ETHOD 

This section formalizes the Sensor-Driven L´ evy-Walk (SDLW) controller as a constant-time reactive pipeline. Each control cycle uses four local range measurements to estimate open directions, samples a discrete L´ evy segment length to preserve heavy-tailed exploration, and selects a stochastic heading from a sensor-conditioned von Mises distribution. The resulting command is executed by a two-state Ro-tate /Move controller. The subsections follow this pipeline. Section II-A defines the minimal agent and sensing model. Section II-B specifies the discrete L´ evy step-length sampler used to generate ex-ploratory motion segments. Section II-C defines the sensor-weighted heading policy that biases those segments toward open space while retaining stochasticity. Section II-D then combines these components into the full reactive controller. 

A. Agent and Sensing Model 

Consider k identical palm-sized nano-UAVs operating in a bounded, cluttered 2-D domain. Each agent i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }

maintains a planar pose (xi, y i, ψ i), where ψi is the yaw (heading). Per control cycle, the agent acquires a fixed set of directional distance measurements 

Ri ≜ {rF , r L, r R, r B },

corresponding to front (0) , left (+ π/ 2) , right (−π/ 2) , and back (π) directions in the agent frame (Fig. 1). There is no global localization and no mapping; search decisions rely only on Ri and constant-size state, without explicit coordination. 

B. Discrete L´ evy Step-Length Sampling 

Each agent performs motion in segments (“jumps”) of length d ≥ 0. Let the agent’s L´ evy exponent αi be sampled once at initialization, 

αi ∼ Uniform(2 , 3) ,

to diversify search across the team without explicit coordi-nation. Given bounds dmin > 0 and dmax > d min , we adopt the discrete law: 

Pr[ d = 0] = 12 , (1) 

Pr[ d = j] = j−αi

Pjmax  

> ℓ=jmin

ℓ−αi

, j ∈ { jmin , . . . , j max }, (2) Algorithm 1 Discrete L´ evy Step-Length Sampler 

Require: α ∈ (2 , 3) , dmin > 0, dmax > d min  

> 1:

jmin ← ⌈ dmin ⌉; jmax ← ⌊ dmax ⌋ 

> 2:

With probability 1/2, return 0 

> 3:

Z ← Pjmax  

> ℓ=jmin

ℓ−α 

> 4:

Sample j ∈ { jmin , . . . , j max } with Pr[ j] = j−α/Z  

> 5:

return j

R

rF

rRrL

rB   

> Fig. 1. Sensor geometry (top-down view). The robot acquires four orthogonal distance measurements ( rF, r L, r R, r B) in its local frame, corresponding to front, left, right, and back directions.

where jmin = ⌈dmin ⌉ and jmax = ⌊dmax ⌋.We retain Pr[ d = 0] = 1 /2 exactly to match the discrete formulation in [4] rather than introduce an extra design parameter. Operationally, a d = 0 draw yields a rotate-only cycle: the agent reorients to a new heading without forward motion, then samples a fresh step length d for the subsequent move phase. The same obstacle-threshold checks apply during rotation, so small axial or lateral nudges can occur if any range is below the safety threshold. Algorithm 1 provides the complete sampling procedure, which executes in constant time due to the fixed support size. 

C. Sensor-Driven Stochastic Heading Selection 

Let the four sensor directions in the world frame be 

Θ ≜ {ψi, ψ i + π 

> 2

, ψ i − π 

> 2

, ψ i + π}.

This sensing architecture matches platforms such as the Bitcraze Crazyflie, whose Multi-ranger deck provides exactly these four orthogonal distance measurements. We compute a sensor-weighted resultant that favors open directions and mildly penalizes moving backward. Define per-direction multipliers β = {1, 1, 1, β B } with 0 ≤ βB ≤ 1 (backward penalty), and weights 

ws ≜ βs r2 

> s

, s ∈ { F, L, R, B }.

The resultant vector is 

v ≜ X

> s

ws

cos Θ s

sin Θ s



, W ≜ X

> s

ws,

with mean direction μ ≜ atan2( vy , v x) and openness (see Fig. 2 for examples) 

o ≜ ∥v∥

W + ε , o ∈ [0 , 1] ,

where ε > 0 is a small numerical guard that keeps the denominator nonzero in degenerate cases, such as when all usable range measurements are zero. The metric o quantifies the degree to which the weighted resultant is unidirectional; 

(a) Open Corridor (b) Constrained Junction 

> obstacle

wF

wL wR

wB

v    

> ∥v∥large; o≈0.47
> obstacle

wF

wL wR

wB

v              

> ∥v∥small; o≈0.22
> Fig. 2. Sensor-weighted resultant in contrasting geometries. (a) Open corridor with large forward distance yields dominant wF(proportional to r2
> F), producing a strong unidirectional resultant vwith high openness
> o. (b) Constrained T-junction with obstacles nearby in multiple directions yields more balanced weights and a weak, ambiguous resultant vwith low openness o.

o

κ(o)      

> constrained
> open
> 01
> κmin
> κmax
> Fig. 3. Openness-to-concentration mapping. The linear mapping in (3) decreases von Mises concentration as openness increases: open spaces use lower κfor wider exploration, while constrained spaces use higher κfor more cautious steering. Markers indicate example openness values from Fig. 2.

high openness indicates strong directional consensus (open space), while low openness reflects ambiguous or conflicting sensor signals (tight geometries). To preserve randomness in wide spaces yet be cautious in tight areas, we map openness to the von Mises concentration: 

κ(o) ≜ κmax − (κmax − κmin ) o, (3) with constants 0 < κ min ≤ κmax (illustrated in Fig. 3). This linear mapping balances exploration and safety: in open regions where the weighted resultant is strong, lower κ values permit wider directional variance, allowing exploration of unvisited space. Conversely, in constrained corridors where geometry is ambiguous, higher κ values concentrate the distribution toward the strongest geometrical cue, reduc-ing collision-inducing tangential excursions. This empirical adaptive strategy complements the discrete L´ evy framework by making reactive headings responsive to local structure. The heading command θ for the next segment is sampled as 

θ ∼ VonMises  μ, κ (o),

where the effect of varying κ on the heading distribution is shown in Fig. 4. The complete sensor-driven heading selection procedure is given in Algorithm 2. 

D. Control State Machine 

Fig. 5 depicts the two-state reactive controller structure. Low κ (Exploration) Moderate κ High κ (Caution)                

> μ
> κ≈1
> μ
> κ≈5
> μ
> κ≈10
> Fig. 4. Von Mises heading distributions at increasing concentration. Each panel shows sample angles (blue dots) drawn from VonMises( μ, κ )with mean μdirected to the right (orange arrow). Low κ(left) permits wide directional exploration; high κ(right) concentrates samples tightly around
> μ, suitable for constrained navigation.

Algorithm 2 Sensor-Driven von Mises Heading 

Require: Ranges (rF , r L, r R, r B ), heading ψ, params 

(βB , κ min , κ max , ε ) 

> 1:

Θ ← { ψ, ψ + π 

> 2

, ψ − π 

> 2

, ψ + π} 

> 2:

β ← { 1, 1, 1, β B }; R ← { rF , r L, r R, r B } 

> 3:

ws ← βs R2 

> s

; W ← P 

> s

ws; v ←P 

> s

ws[cos Θ s, sin Θ s]⊤ 

> 4:

μ ← atan2( vy , v x); o ← ∥ v∥/(W + ε) 

> 5:

κ ← κmax − (κmax − κmin ) clip( o, 0, 1)  

> 6:

return θ ∼ VonMises( μ, κ )

We employ a two-state controller per agent: Rotate →

Move . Let δψ be the heading tolerance, and τ the control period. Controllers initialize in Rotate with θ = 0 and sample the first step length d at the first Rotate →Move 

transition. 

Rotate: If |wrap( θ − ψi)| > δ ψ , apply a saturated yaw rate toward θ. During rotation, all four ranges are checked and small axial or lateral nudges are applied when any range falls below the safety threshold to create immediate clearance. 

Move: Advance at constant speed until either (i) the traveled distance reaches d, or (ii) an imminent obstacle is detected ( rF below threshold). In either case, switch to 

Rotate and resample heading via the von Mises policy. On the next Rotate →Move transition, sample a new d via (1)-(2). Algorithm 3 presents the complete reactive L´ evy-walk controller integrating discrete step sampling, sensor-driven heading selection, and the two-state control structure. 

E. Collision Handling and Safety 

We adopt conservative thresholds on front/side ranges for emergency slowdown/stop and small nudges that push away from close obstacles. The openness mapping (3) increases κ

in tight spaces, narrowing the von Mises spread and reducing collision-inducing grazing. Backward motion is discouraged by βB < 1 but permitted when necessary. 

F. Implementation for Nano-UAVs 

The control design is amenable to efficient execution on resource-constrained microcontrollers. Computation employs fixed-size four-element vector operations and scalar arith-metic, eliminating dynamic memory allocation. Trigonomet-ric functions employ lookup tables or polynomial approxima-tions to reduce latency; random sampling for discrete L´ evy 

Algorithm 3 Reactive L´ evy-Walk Controller (per agent, per cycle)  

> 1:

if initialization then sample αi ∼ Uniform(2 , 3)  

> 2:

if state = Rotate then  

> 3:

if |wrap( θ − ψ)| ≤ δψ then  

> 4:

d ← sampleDiscreteLevy (αi, d min , d max ) ▷

Alg. 1  

> 5:

reset distance accumulator; state ← Move  

> 6:

else  

> 7:

apply yaw toward θ; axial or lateral nudges if any range is small  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

else if state = Move then  

> 10:

update traveled distance from odometry/estimate  

> 11:

if (traveled ≥ d) or (rF < r th ) then  

> 12:

(μ, o ) ← sensorResultant (rF , r L, r R, r B , ψ ) 

> 13:

κ ← κ(o); θ ← sampleVonMises( μ, κ ) ▷ Alg. 2  

> 14:

state ← Rotate  

> 15:

else  

> 16:

apply forward velocity; lateral nudges if rL or 

rR small  

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end if 

and von Mises distributions uses lightweight generators with precomputed probability tables to minimize normalization overhead. These techniques preserve constant-time operation across all control cycles. The Bitcraze Crazyflie platform (STM32F405 ARM Cortex-M4, 168 MHz, 192 kB SRAM) exemplifies the target hardware; the minimal state require-ments (only pose and heading estimates) are well within its memory constraints, supporting operation at the typical update rates (10–20 Hz) of nano-UAV flight control. III. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

We evaluate the proposed Sensor-Driven L´ evy-Walk (SDLW) controller in the open-source IR-SIM simulator, a lightweight Python framework for navigation, control, and multi-robot scenarios with configurable robots, sensors, and environments [12]. Evaluation focuses on coverage efficiency and collision robustness across three representative arenas and five team sizes. We compare against a baseline (Uniform Heading L´ evy Walk) under identical sensing, kinematics, and safety constraints to isolate the contribution of sensor-adaptive heading selection. 

A. Simulator and Configuration 

Simulator. IR-SIM v2.9.0 provides collision detection, configurable holonomic kinematics, 1D time-of-flight range sensing, and scenario specification via YAML. Scenarios execute with physics integration and rendering disabled for high-throughput, repeatably randomized trials [12]. 

Arenas (all 20 m × 20 m): We evaluate on three environments representative of indoor nano-UAV operations: (1) Open —rectangular boundary, no internal obstacles; (2) 

Rooms-and-corridors —three rectangular rooms connected by a 2 m-wide horizontal corridor and a 4 m-wide ver-tical corridor with 1 m door openings; (3) Cluttered-50 —50 randomly placed non-overlapping circular obstacles with |wrap( θ − ψ)| ≤ δψ

Rotate 

yaw → θ

Move 

forward motion 

reached d or rF < r th 

enter Move ⇒ sample d

enter Rotate ⇒

θ ← VonMises( μ, κ )

Inputs: rF , r L, r R, r B , ψ 

Compute: (μ, o ), κ(o)

Safety (Rotate): axial nudges if rF or rB small 

Progress: accumulate traveled distance Safety (Move): lateral nudges if rL or rR small          

> Fig. 5. Two-state reactive controller. Agents alternate between Rotate , where heading error is reduced via yaw, and Move , where forward motion progresses until distance dis reached or an obstacle is detected ( rF< r th ). The sensor-driven von Mises policy recomputes heading on each Rotate
> entry, adapting concentration κ(o)to local geometry.

(a) Rooms & Corridors (b) Cluttered (50)  

> Fig. 6. Representative arena layouts: (a) three rooms connected by a 2 m-wide horizontal corridor and a 4 m-wide vertical corridor with 1 m door openings; (b) 50 randomly placed obstacles (seed 42 example).

radii in [0.2, 0.6] m. These span from geometrically coher-ent (open/structured) to geometrically ambiguous (random), testing heading adaptation across structure diversity. Repre-sentative layouts for the structured and cluttered arenas are shown in Fig. 6. 

Robot model. Holonomic kinematics with fixed forward speed 0.5 m s −1, saturated yaw rate | ˙ψ|max = 0 .5 rad s −1

(28 .6 ◦ s−1), and collision radius 0.10 m . These parame-ters reflect typical nano-UAV capabilities, with conservative speed and turn limits to allow safe operation in tight spaces and at low update rates. 

Sensing. Four orthogonal 1D distance readings (front, left, right, back) in the agent’s local frame, maximum range 4 m ,simulating the Bitcraze Crazyflie Multi-ranger deck. 

Parameters. Step bounds dmin = 0 .5 m , dmax = 20 m 

span feasible segment lengths for sub-50 g platforms in 

20 m ×20 m arenas. Von Mises parameters κmin = 0.6,

κmax = 10 provide directional spread in open areas while narrowing in confined spaces. Backward penalty βB = 0 .3,heading tolerance δψ = 5 ◦, and obstacle threshold rth =0.4 m use conservative safety margins suitable for 10–20 Hz onboard control. 

Baseline. Uniform Heading L´ evy Walk (UHLW): identical discrete L´ evy steps and safety-handling as SDLW, but head-ing selected uniformly from (−π, π ) and the sensor-adaptive von Mises branch is bypassed. This isolates the contribution of sensor-adaptive heading selection. 

Experimental protocol. Team sizes: k ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8, 12 }

agents. 50 independent random trials per condition, 15 minute horizon, grid-based coverage metric (0.25 m cells). IV. R ESULTS 

We present results across three representative arenas and five team sizes. SDLW consistently outperforms UHLW, with gains correlated to environmental geometry coherence. 

A. Coverage Performance 

Fig. 7 shows that SDLW substantially accelerates coverage accumulation relative to UHLW across all conditions, achiev-ing 79.6% higher mean coverage in Open, 43.1% in Rooms and Corridors, and 13.6% in Cluttered (50 obstacles) arenas consistently across all team sizes. Coverage gains are largest in structured environments and modest in random obstacles. 

B. Safety and Robustness 

Fig. 8 summarizes collision robustness, showing consistent SDLW advantages across environments. In the Open arena, SDLW incurs 13.0% fewer mean collisions than UHLW across all team sizes, with the benefit particularly pronounced at larger k: at k = 12 , SDLW achieves 4.08 collisions compared to UHLW’s 4.80. The Rooms and Corridors en-vironment shows a moderate SDLW advantage, with 7.1% lower mean collisions and consistent improvements across most team sizes tested. In the Cluttered (50 obstacles) arena, SDLW maintains a modest collision advantage with 1.4% fewer mean collisions than UHLW overall. At moderate team sizes ( k = 8), collision rates are comparable (2.92 vs. 2.94), while at k =12 collision counts show SDLW with 5.72 and UHLW with 5.54. Collision reduction benefits are substantial in open and structured spaces, and modest in random obstacle layouts. The current logging pipeline records aggregate per-robot collision flags rather than classifying contacts as obstacle or inter-agent events, so these counts should be interpreted as overall collision robustness rather than type-specific failure rates. 

C. Limitations 

Key limitations: (i) simulation assumes perfect noiseless sensing; real sensors exhibit noise and measurement artifacts; (ii) 2-D planar model abstracts vertical dynamics and 3-D Open arena 

Rooms & Corridors 

Cluttered (50) 

Fig. 7. Coverage over time for k ∈ {1, 4, 8, 12 } agents (columns); results with k = 2 omitted for brevity. Coverage is defined as the fraction of free-space grid cells ( 0.25 m resolution) visited by any team member. Mean coverage with standard-deviation shading over 50 trials. Blue: SDLW (sensor-adaptive); Purple: UHLW (uniform heading). SDLW substantially outperforms in structured environments, achieving 79.6% higher coverage in Open and 43.1% in Rooms & Corridors, with 13.6% advantage in cluttered layouts where sensor-adaptive heading benefits geometry-driven exploration. 

Fig. 8. Collision events per trial across arenas and team sizes. Mean collisions for SDLW (ours, blue) and Uniform Heading L´ evy Walk (UHLW, purple), with error bars showing standard error. SDLW demonstrates consis-tent collision reduction across all environments: Open shows a particularly strong 13.0% mean reduction, while Rooms & Corridors achieves 7.1% fewer collisions. Even in the cluttered arena, SDLW maintains a modest 1.4% collision advantage. The sensor-adaptive strategy provides collision benefits across environments, with the magnitude varying based on geomet-ric structure coherence. 

obstacles; (iii) fixed parameters throughout execution; adap-tive tuning could reduce parameter sensitivity by learning κ

values from brief exploration phases, at the cost of increased computational overhead; (iv) hardware validation on actual nano-UAVs with real sensing and actuation latencies remains essential. V. C ONCLUSION 

This work presents a Sensor-Driven L´ evy-Walk (SDLW) controller for palm-sized nano-UAVs, combining discrete L´ evy step lengths with sensor-adaptive von Mises heading selection. The controller operates at constant computational cost, requires only four directional distance readings, and en-ables decentralized exploration without inter-robot communi-cation for exploration control or prior knowledge. Simulation results demonstrate substantial coverage gains (up to 79.6%) and collision reduction (up to 13.0%) from sensor-weighted directional bias, with benefits largest in structured envi-ronments where geometry provides strong directional cues. SDLW provides a practical, lightweight baseline for scal-able multi-robot exploration suitable for resource-constrained teams. Future work includes online learning of concentration parameters κmin , κmax and openness-to-κ mappings, tempo-ral smoothing of sensor histories to reduce noise sensitivity, consideration of ToF sensors with higher angular resolution, and hardware validation on physical nano-UAV platforms under real sensing and actuation constraints. REFERENCES [1] C. Friess, V. Niculescu, T. Polonelli, M. Magno, and L. Benini, “Fully onboard slam for distributed mapping with a swarm of nano-drones,” 

IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 11, no. 20, pp. 32 363–32 380, 2024. [2] V. Niculescu, T. Polonelli, M. Magno, and L. Benini, “Ultra-lightweight collaborative slam for robot swarms,” IEEE Access , 2025. [3] V. Zaburdaev, S. Denisov, and J. Klafter, “L´ evy walks,” Reviews of Modern Physics , vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 483–530, 2015. [4] A. Clementi, F. d’Amore, G. Giakkoupis, and E. Natale, “Search via parallel l´ evy walks on z2,” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , 2021, pp. 81–91. [5] D. Marthaler, A. L. Bertozzi, and I. B. Schwartz, “Levy searches based on a priori information: The biased levy walk,” California Univ Los Angeles Dept of Mathematics, Tech. Rep. CAM-04-50, 2004. [6] R. K. Ramachandran, Z. Kakish, and S. Berman, “Information corre-lated l´ evy walk exploration and distributed mapping using a swarm of robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 1422–1441, 2020. [7] D. K. Sutantyo, S. Kernbach, P. Levi, and V. A. Nepomnyashchikh, “Multi-robot searching algorithm using l´ evy flight and artificial poten-tial field,” in 2010 IEEE Safety Security and Rescue Robotics . IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–6. [8] J. Beal, “Superdiffusive dispersion and mixing of swarms with reactive levy walks,” in 2013 IEEE 7th International Conference on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems . IEEE, 2013, pp. 141–148. [9] Y. Khaluf, S. Van Havermaet, and P. Simoens, “Collective l´ evy walk for efficient exploration in unknown environments,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems, and Ap-plications . Springer, 2018, pp. 260–264. [10] W. Giernacki, M. Skwierczy´ nski, W. Witwicki, P. Wro´ nski, and P. Kozierski, “Crazyflie 2.0 quadrotor as a platform for research and education in robotics and control engineering,” in 2017 22nd international conference on methods and models in automation and robotics (MMAR) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 37–42. [11] K. N. McGuire, C. De Wagter, K. Tuyls, H. J. Kappen, and G. C. H. E. de Croon, “Minimal navigation solution for a swarm of tiny flying robots to explore an unknown environment,” Science Robotics ,vol. 4, no. 35, p. eaaw9710, 2019. [12] R. Han, “IR-SIM: An Open-Source Lightweight Simulator for Robot Navigation, Control, and Learning,” Jan. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/hanruihua/ir-sim