Belief-Adaptive Online Autonomy for Quadrotor UAV Navigation under
GNSS Degradation in Urban Environments
Deepak Kumar Panda1 and Weisi Guo1
Abstract— Reliable online autonomy is critical for quadrotor
operation in urban airspaces, where global navigation satellite
systems (GNSS) measurements suffer from multipath, block-
age, and latency issues, introducing non-stationary, temporally
correlated errors that degrade conventional GNSS–IMU fusion.
This paper presents a belief-adaptive online autonomy frame-
work that augments an extended Kalman filter (EKF) with ex-
plicit GNSS trust modelling, second-order online belief adapta-
tion, and latency-aware out-of-sequence measurement handling.
GNSS trust is represented as a latent belief state that modulates
measurement weighting and multipath bias uncertainty, and is
updated online using EKF consistency signals. Unlike reactive
covariance tuning, the proposed approach enables proactive
and stable sensor trust adaptation without prior environmental
knowledge or offline training. Evaluation in simulated urban
air mobility scenarios with correlated multipath, stochastic
latency, and obstacle constraints demonstrates improved belief
convergence, smoother trajectories, and reduced estimation and
tracking errors compared to naive, adaptive, and first-order
baselines. The framework preserves classical GNSS-IMU fusion
structure and can be integrated directly into existing flight-
control pipelines, supporting robust online autonomy in GNSS-
degraded environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Urban air mobility (UAM) places stringent requirements
on the navigation reliability of quadrotor unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) operating in dense urban airspaces [1].
Quadrotors, navigating in an integrated airspace, must main-
tain accurate and resilient positioning while flying close to
urban infrastructures [2]. Global navigation satellite systems
(GNSS) remain the primary source of position, navigation,
and timing (PNT) information for quadrotor flight control [3,
4], offering high accuracy under open-sky conditions. How-
ever, in urban environments GNSS performance degrades due
to signal blockage, multipath reflections [5], interference,
and latency [6]. These effects introduce non-line-of-sight
propagation and non-stationary errors [7] that violate the
assumptions of conventional navigation filters and pose a
major challenge for reliable UAM autonomy.
To improve robustness, GNSS is commonly fused with
inertial measurement units (IMUs) in loosely or tightly cou-
pled architectures [3, 8, 9]. IMUs provide high-rate motion
information that enables quadrotors to bridge short GNSS
outages and maintain smooth state estimates. However, IMU-
only dead reckoning accumulates bias and scale-factor errors,
*The work is supported by EPSRC CHEDDAR: Communications Hub
for Empowering Distributed clouD computing Applications and Research
(EP/X040518/1) (EP/Y037421/1) and Royal Academy of Engineering UKIC
Fellowship
1The authors are with Centre for Connected and Assured Auton-
omy, Cranfield University, Bedford MK43 0AL Deepak.Panda,
Weisi.Guo @cranfield.ac.uk
making periodic GNSS correction essential for long-term ac-
curacy. As a result, GNSS–IMU fusion remains the baseline
navigation architecture for quadrotor UAM platforms.
The performance of GNSS–IMU fusion is dependent on
the underlying estimation algorithms like Extended Kalman
filters (EKF) [10] and unscented Kalman filters [11], which
perform approximate Bayesian inference under assumed
process and measurement noise distribution. In urban en-
vironments, GNSS errors vary abruptly due to multipath,
blockage, and latency [12], yet are often modeled using
fixed or slowly tuned covariances. This assumption of static
sensor reliability can lead to position estimation errors that
may compromise mission safety under unpredictable GNSS
conditions.
Adaptive filtering approaches have been proposed to mit-
igate non-stationary GNSS errors, including innovation and
residual-based covariance tuning [13], redundant noise esti-
mation [14], variational Bayesian filtering [15], and robust
heavy-tailed formulations [16]. Despite their differences,
these methods share a common structural assumption that
sensor reliability is inferred reactively from innovation or
residual statistics at the current time step, while not capturing
the measurement degradation explicitly. However, in urban
GNSS environments these assumptions break down, as mul-
tipath effects, signal blockages and latencies generate abrupt,
geometry-dependent, and temporally correlated errors. As
a result, innovation-based covariance adaptation often re-
sponds only after large errors have already corrupted the
state estimate, leading to delayed recovery and inconsistent
estimator confidence. Redundant noise estimation and vari-
ational Bayesian methods [14, 15] assume local stationarity,
limiting adaptation to rapidly varying GNSS degradation.
Heavy-tailed filters [16] mitigate isolated outliers but struggle
with persistent multipath bias and delayed measurements that
break temporal alignment assumptions. More importantly,
these methods lack an explicit mechanism to represent and
adapt measurement trust over time, preventing sustained
modulation of filter behavior. Machine-learning-based nav-
igation methods have also been explored to model nonlinear
and context-dependent GNSS errors [17, 18]. While effec-
tive in specific settings, such approaches introduce training
dependence, additional computational overhead, and sensi-
tivity to out-of-distribution conditions, posing challenges to
quadrotor autonomy in UAM. Collectively, these limitations
motivate lightweight online adaptation mechanisms that pre-
serve the structure and interpretability of classical estimation
pipelines, while enabling proactive adjustment of sensor trust
under non-stationary urban GNSS degradation.
arXiv:2609.14806v1  [cs.RO]  13 Sep 2026


In this paper, a second-order online belief-adaptive EKF
is proposed for quadrotor navigation under GNSS degra-
dation. The framework represents GNSS reliability as an
explicit latent belief state that governs both measurement
weighting and multipath-bias dynamics, and updates this
belief online using a curvature-aware adaptation rule driven
by filter consistency signals. Unlike conventional adaptive
filters that adjust sensor confidence only after large residuals
have occurred, the proposed approach proactively modulates
GNSS trust, yielding improved performance under non-
stationary conditions. In contrast to ML-based sensor fusion
techniques, the proposed online learning mechanism operates
without offline training on environment-specific data [17,
19], enabling data-efficient, and robust adaptation suitable
for UAM operations. In addition, a latency-aware out-of-
sequence update mechanism, similar to the approach in [6], is
integrated to retroactively correct delayed measurements and
re-propagate state estimates, ensuring temporally consistent
GNSS–IMU fusion in the presence of measurement latency.
This paper does not propose a new planner, controller or
GNSS degradation model; they serve as a controlled ex-
perimental environment to isolate and evaluate the effect of
second-order belief adaptation within the estimation layer.
This paper contributes only to the estimator adaptation layer;
all other modules remain fixed across comparisons. The
paper contributions can be summarized as follows:
• Curvature-Aware Second-order Online Belief Adap-
tation for GNSS Trust Modulation: We introduce a
dual-timescale second-order online Newton update that
explicitly models GNSS reliability as a latent belief
state governing both measurement covariance and bias
process dynamics. Unlike innovation-based covariance
tuning, the proposed mechanism adapts trust proactively
using curvature information, yielding improved dynamic
navigation under non-stationary degradation.
• Evaluation in Urban Air Mobility Environments:
The framework is evaluated in a sample urban air mo-
bility simulation framework with geometry-dependent
multipath bias and correlated latency, while comparing
against vanilla EKF, non-belief aware adaptive EKF
with ablation study comparison with first-order meth-
ods.
II. QUADROTOR NAVIGATION SYSTEM
Figure 1 illustrates an integrated closed-loop architec-
ture for autonomous point-to-point UAV navigation in ur-
ban environment. The quadrotor follows standard nonlinear
rigid-body dynamics [20] with a cascaded position-attitude
controller. The mission objectives and obstacle informa-
tion in the urban airspace environment are processed by
a global mission planner to generate a sequence of way-
points p1,··· , pN and subsequently minimum jerk reference
trajectory pref. This reference trajectory is tracked by a
cascaded position–attitude controller, which computes low-
level control commands using the feedback of the estimated
states from EKF. In parallel, a predictor–corrector state
estimator as, a part of EKF, fuses high-rate IMU data with
GNSS measurements zj from navigation satellites to estimate
the quadrotor position ˆxk, and the resulting estimated position
is fed back to the controller to enable accurate and robust
trajectory tracking under sensing uncertainty.
A. Global Path Planning in Urban Environment
The operational environment is represented as a 2D binary
occupancy grid G ⊂Z2, where buildings are modeled as
axis-aligned rectangular obstacles, consistent with urban GIS
abstractions and voxelized city maps. Obstacle clearance is
quantified using an Euclidean distance transform (EDT) and
incorporated directly into the global planning cost.
dobs(c) = min
c′∈O∥c−c′∥2,
(1)
where O denotes the set of occupied cells due to obstacles.
Modified A* is used as a global planner on the grid repre-
senting urban environment, while considering the curvature-
aware costs that affect downstream quadrotor trajectory
tracking. Total evaluation function for the global planner is
defined as,
f (n) = g(n)+h(n),
(2)
where g(n) is the accumulated path cost, and h(n) is
the admissible heuristic. The path cost at node nk, g(nk),
depends on the previous cost g(nk−1) and the incremental
cost ginc (·).The criteria for expanding from node nk−1 to nk
considers the:
• Traversal cost enforcing path length minimization
gtra
inc (·).
• Regularization cost which discourages aggressive turns
that are dynamically infeasible for quadrotors gturn
inc (·).
• Clearance cost representing the distance from the near-
est obstacle gclr
inc (·).
Hence, the total accumulated path cost for the quadrotor
tracking is given by:
f (n) = wtra ·gtra
inc (·)+wturn ·gturn
inc (·)+wclr ·gclr
inc (·)+h(n).
(3)
The heuristic h(n) is chosen as the Euclidean distance to
the goal, given by, h(n) = ∥pn −pgoal∥2. After solving the
given global planning algorithm resulting plan is a sequence
of waypoints given by
P =

pwp
0 , pwp
1 ,··· , pwp
N
	
.
(4)
Based on the waypoints obtained in (4), the next task is for
the quadrotor control system to track the straight line, based
on the reference trajectory generated as given in the next
subsection.
B. Reference Trajectory Generation
Based on the discrete sequence of the waypoints given in
(4), a time-parametrized minimum-jerk trajectory is gener-
ated between each consecutive waypoint pair
 pwp
i , pwp
i+1

.
For each segment, motion is parameterized over a fixed
horizon Ti using a normalized time variable ˜s = t/Ti,
˜s ∈
[0,1]. The position trajectory is defined as,
p(˜s) = (1−α (˜s)) pi +α (˜s) pi+1,
(5)


Airspace
Environment
Obstacle
Information
Mission
Objectives
P2P
navigation
Navigation
Satellites
Position 
Controller
Attitude
Controller
 
Cascaded Controller
Predictor
Corrector
State Estimator
Mission
Planner
Reference
Trajectory
Global Planner
IMU
Fig. 1.
Overview of the closed-loop mission planning, estimation, and control architecture for autonomous UAV navigation.
where α (˜s) = 10˜s3 −15˜s4 + 6˜s5 is classical minimum-jerk
polynomial. Similarly, reference velocity and acceleration
can be obtained by differentiating the position trajectory
given in (5) accordingly. The reference trajectories ensure
smooth continuity with bounded acceleration and no jerk
discontinuities.
C. Quadrotor Dynamics
We consider a rigid body quadrotor operating at low
altitude in an urban environment. The full state vector is
defined as per [20],
s = [x,y,z,vx,vy,vz,ϕ,ϑ, ˜ψ, p,q,r].
(6)
Here, (x,y,z) denote inertial-frame position, (vx,vy,vz) repre-
sents linear velocity, (ϕ,ϑ, ˜ψ) represent roll, pitch and yaw
angles and (p,q,r) represents body-frame angular rates.
˙p = v,
˙v = 1
m ρ(ϕ,ϑ, ˜ψ)


0
0
T

−


0
0
gg

,
(7)
where m represent the quadrotor mass, T is the total thrust, gg
being the gravitational acceleration and ρ (·) is the rotational
matrix from the body to the inertial frame. The rotation
matrix ρ in (6) is defined as,
ρ =


cψcθ
cψsθsφ −sψcφ
cψsθcφ +sψsφ
sψcθ
sψsθsφ +cψcφ
sψsθcφ −cψsφ
−sθ
cθsφ
cθcφ

.
Here, c(·) and s(·) represent cosine and sine functions.
1) Rotational Dynamics: The rotational dynamics follow
rigid-body equations shown as follows
˙ω = I−1(τ −ω ×(Iω)),
(8)
where ω = [p,q,r]T, τ =

τϕ,τϑ,τ ˜ψ
T and I is the inertia
matrix. Euler angles are propagated via first-order integration
of body rates. The full nonlinear quadrotor model is dis-
cretized at IMU rate of 200 Hz for simulation and estimation
propagation.
2) Cascaded Control Systems:
Trajectory tracking is
achieved using a cascaded outer-loop position controller and
inner-loop attitude controller, operating on the estimated state
provided by the onboard state estimator [20]. The controller-
estimator structure ensures system stability in case of laten-
cies and data corruption in safety-critical environment similar
to [21]. Given the reference trajectory (pref, ˙pref, ¨pref), the
commanded acceleration is computed as,
acmd = ¨pref +Kp
 pref −ˆp

+Kd
 ˙pref −ˆv

+Ki
Z  pref −ˆp

dt.
(9)
where ˆp and ˆv are the estimated position and velocity
from EKF, and Kp,Ki,Kd are proportional, integral and
derivative gain to track the reference trajectory. To prevent
the integrator windup, the integral term is activated when
position reference and value is within a given threshold
∥pref −ˆp∥< εint. The commanded acceleration vector is
mapped to desired roll and pitch angles under the small-
angle approximation to generate attitude references provided
as follows:
ϕcmd = −acmd,y
gg
,
ϑcmd = −acmd,x
gg
.
(10)
The commanded thrust is provided as Tcmd = m(gg +acmd,z).
The desired yaw angle is held constant or aligned with
the heading to minimize the lateral drag. The inner-loop
stabilization is achieved via PD control with angular-rate
damping. The control torques are provided as
τϕ = kϕ (ϕcmd −ϕ)−dϕ p,
τϑ = kϑ (ϑcmd −ϑ)−dϑ q.
(11)
The cascaded structure ensures time-scale separation, allow-
ing the inner loop to stabilize attitude dynamics significantly
faster than the outer-loop translational controller.
III. ONLINE AUTONOMY FRAMEWORK
As shown in Fig. 2, the predictor–corrector EKF is aug-
mented with a belief-driven adaptation layer that models
GNSS reliability in real time. Innovation consistency statis-
tics are used to update a scalar belief variable β, which mod-
ulates measurement covariance to proactively adjust sensor


trust. The update does not increase the EKF state dimension
and adds negligible computational overhead, preserving real-
time feasibility. A state buffer supports temporally consistent
and out-of-sequence measurement handling, ensuring stable
closed-loop estimation under GNSS degradation.
Navigation
Satellites
Online Learning Framework
Predictor
Corrector
State Estimator
IMU
 Learning
Loss
Belief 
Update
State
Buffer
Fig. 2.
Schematic of the belief-adaptive online learning framework for
UAV navigation.
A. Extended Kalman Filter
1) Process Model: We consider the EKF maintaining an
augmented state-vector xk ≜

pk
vk
bk
T ∈R1×9. Here
xk,vk represent the position and velocity estimate, and bk
represents the estimated bias due to GNSS degradation. The
overall process model is given by,
xk+1 = Fxk +Bak +wk,
(12)
with F =


I
∆t I
0
0
I
0
0
0
αI

, B =


1
2∆t2 I
∆t I
0

. The process noise
wk is a zero-mean random disturbance capturing unmodelled
dynamics, and modelling uncertainty in the propagation
step due to potential GNSS degradation here. We consider
E[wk] = 0,
E

wT
k wk

= Qk.. We can decompose that as
Qk =

Qpv
0
0
Qb(βk)

Qpv = σ2
a


∆t3
3 I
∆t2
2 I
∆t2
2 I
∆t I

.
(13)
Here,
Qb (βk) =
 1−α2
σ2
b (β)I,
with
σb (βk) =
(1−βk +εk).
Here
βk
is
the
belief
parameter
which
has to be adapted thus enabling the estimator to respond
quickly to GNSS degradation via covariance matrix Qk
2) Measurement Model: GNSS provides position mea-
surement corrupted by multipath bias and latency given by
ˆzk = pk + bk + νk. If
ˆ
xk|k−1 represents the predicted state
from the process model xk, we can compute the normalized
innovation square (NIS) from the measurement residuals as,
yk = zk −H
ˆ
xk|k−1,
Sk = HPk|k−1HT +Rk
NISk = yT
k S−1
k yk
(14)
B. Online Learning Framework
Classical adaptive EKFs, adjust measurement covariance
reactively from instantaneous innovations, assuming locally
informative and weakly correlated residuals, which leads
to delayed and unstable trust adaptation under geometry-
dependent multipath and latency. To address this, we intro-
duce an explicit scalar belief state βk as a structural augmen-
tation of the EKF, as per (12), that modulates GNSS trust
via covariance adaptation, updated via a curvature-aware
second-order online learning. The proposed dual-timescale
curvature accumulation approximates an online Newton step
for fast, stable, and bounded trust adaptation parametrized
by a sigmoid function as follows,
βk = σ (θk) =
1
1+e−θk .
(15)
In addition to the innovation consistency, abrupt changes
in the estimated state may indicate instability caused by
corrupted measurements ˜zk. Hence, a hybrid loss function
is considered as,
ℓk = log

1+ NISk
χ2
0.95

+λ
 ˆpk|k −ˆpk−1|k−1

2 ,
(16)
where the first term penalizes statistical inconsistency and
the second discourages rapid fluctuations in the estimated
position. The gradient of the loss with respect to θk, using
second order Newton methods, is given by:
∇θlk = −δl
δβ βk (1−βk),
(17)
where δl
δβ is obtained through differentiation of (16) with re-
spect to the belief-dependent covariance terms. We maintain
two second-moment accumulators of the gradient magnitude:
Hfast
k
= α f Hfast
k−1 +∇θlk
2,
Hslow
k
= αsHslow
k−1 +∇θlk
2,
(18)
where 0 < α f ≪αs < 1. Here Hfast
k
captures short-term
curvature, and Hslow
k
captures long-term curvature in the loss-
function. The effective curvature for learning is a convex
combination given as:
Hk = ω f Hfast
k
+
 1−ωf

Hslow
k
,
ω f ∈(0,1).
(19)
This dual-timescale design allows the learning process to be
both reactive and stable, avoiding oscillations that arise from
purely first-order methods. The belief parameter is updated
using a damped online Newton-type rule, given as,
θk+1 = θk −η
∇θlk
Hk +λreg
(20)
where η is the learning rate and λreg > 0 is a regularization
constant preventing excessive updates when curvature is
small. Hence updated belief is obtained as:
βk+1 = σ (θk+1)
(21)
Now, it is essential to test the proposed online-learning
mechanism against the GNSS degradation model which is
described in the next section.


IV. URBAN ENVIRONMENT AND GNSS DEGRADATION
MODEL
This section defines a controlled degradation environ-
ment designed to evaluate the proposed second-order belief
adaptation mechanism. The multipath and latency models
are simplified, non-physical proxies introduced to induce
non-stationary, correlated, and latency-coupled measurement
degradation. The model is not intended to reproduce absolute
GNSS statistics; rather, it captures the structural conditions
under which conventional adaptive filters degrade. The ob-
jective is to assess estimator adaptation behavior under con-
trolled non-stationarity, not to develop a high-fidelity GNSS
propagation model, which is the focus in subsequent follow-
up works. In order to model the effects of the GNSS degrada-
tion, we consider the quadrotor positions pk = [xk,yk]T, while
computing the minimum Euclidean distance to the nearest
obstacle boundary given as,
dk = min
i d (pk,Oi),
(22)
where d (·) represents Euclidean distance. The scalar dk
serves as a geometric proxy for the GNSS signal obstruc-
tion, obstacle reflection likelihood, and satellite visibility
degradation. The satellite constellation or ray-tracing model
is not considered here for analysis. Given the true GNSS
observation zk,the multipath-induced bias νk is modelled as
a zero-mean measurement noise as it evolves according to
the first-order Gauss Markov process [22]:
bk+1 = κ (dk)bk +wk,
wk ∼N
 0,σ2
b (dk)I

,
(23)
where persistence coefficient κ (dk) and excitation variance
σ2
b which depends on the obstacle proximity of the UAV dk.
The persistence coefficient is defined as,
κ (dk) = exp

−
∆t
Γ(dk)

(24)
The correlation time coefficient is given as:
Γ(dk) =
(
Γcanyon,
dk < dnear,
Γopen,
dk ≥dnear,
Γcanyon ≫Γopen. (25)
The excitation variance is scaled as:
Γb(dk) =
(
σhigh,
dk < dnear,
σlow,
dk ≥dnear.
(26)
The given formulation captures spatial dependence and tem-
poral persistence aspect of the urban GNSS multipath sig-
nals. In addition to multipath bias, GNSS measurement noise
increases in urban environments due to reduced visibility
and degraded precision. This is modeled by inflating the
noise covariance Rk by a factor mk, with mk = rurban >
1 near buildings and mk = 1 otherwise, which represents
increased pseudorange uncertainty without satellite geome-
try model or signal-to-noise ratios. Urban degradation also
introduces time-varying measurement latency due to receiver
and tracking effects. The latency Lk is modeled as a distance-
dependent stochastic process with dynamics given by:
Lk+1 = ζLk +(1−ζ) ¯L(dk)+ϒk.
(27)
Here, ζ ∈(0,1) controls the temporal correlation. The
geometry-dependent mean latency is defined as,
¯L(dk) =
(
Lcanyon,
dk < dnear,
Lopen,
dk ≥dnear,
Lcanyon ≫Lopen.
The implementation of online autonomy framework under
degraded GNSS measurements and time-varying latency is
stated in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Second-order belief-adaptive EKF with latency-
aware GNSS updates
Input IMU measurements ak, degraded GNSS measure-
ments ˆzk, global waypoints P, process and measurement
models (f,h), learning rates (η,λreg), curvature parameters
(α f ,αs,ω).
Output Belief-adaptive state estimates ˆxk.
1: Initialize state estimate ˆx0, covariance P0
2: Initialize belief parameter θ0, belief β0 = σ(θ0)
3: Initialize curvature accumulators Hfast,Hslow > 0
4: for each control step k do
5:
ˆxk|k−1 ←f(ˆxk−1|k−1,ak)
6:
Pk|k−1 ←FkPk−1F⊤
k +(1−α2)σb (βk)2 I
7:
if delayed GNSS measurement zk−d is available then
8:
Innovation y ←zk−d −Hˆxk−d
9:
S ←HPk−dH⊤+R(βk−d)
10:
K ←Pk−dH⊤S−1
11:
ˆxk−d ←ˆxk−d +Ky
12:
Pk−d ←(I−KH)Pk−d
13:
Re-propagate EKF forward to time k
14:
Compute NIS ρk ←y⊤S−1y
15:
end if
16:
Compute the online learning loss as per (16)
17:
Obtain the gradient for online belief update as per
(17).
18:
Update Hfast and Hslow as per (18) to obtain Hk in
(19).
19:
Update the belief parameter as per (20).
20:
Obtain the updated belief parameter βk+1 and update
the measurement covariance matrix Qb (βk+1).
21: end for
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Numerical Implementation
The proposed framework is implemented in Python envi-
ronment while simulating the nonlinear quadrotor model as
defined in (7) with full translational and rotational dynamics
discretized at an IMU rate of 200 Hz (∆timu = 0.005 s),
while control and GNSS updates are applied at 20 Hz (∆tctrl
= 0.05 s). The quadrotor mass is set to 5 kg with inertia
0.02,0.02,0.04 kg·m². IMU acceleration noise has standard
deviation 0.08 m/s2, while nominal GNSS noise is 0.08
m and inflates to 0.1 m under multipath. GNSS multipath
bias follows a first-order Gauss–Markov process with time
constant Γmp = 3 s and maximum bias standard deviation
1.2 m, scaled by obstacle proximity. Measurement latency is


modeled as a geometry-dependent property with correlation
time Γdelay = 2.5 s, noise standard deviation 0.03 s, and
maximum delay capped at 1.2 s while inducing out-of-
sequence updates. Online belief adaptation uses a sigmoid-
parameterized scalar belief updated via a dual-timescale
second-order rule with learning rate η = 0.15 and regulariza-
tion λreg = 0.1, driven by a hybrid loss combining normalized
innovation squared (χ2 threshold at 95%) and inter-step state
variation. Performance is evaluated across multiple urban
point-to-point missions and benchmarked against naive EKF,
adaptive EKF, by modifying the measurement covariance
matrix and first-order belief adaptation baselines.
B. Simulation results
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Time step
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Belief 
1st Order Learning
2nd Order Learning
Fig. 3.
Comparison of belief adaptation over time for first-order and
second-order online learning over 10 mission profiles.
Naive EKF
1st-Order Online Learning
2nd-Order Online Learning
Planned path
Multipath zone
True
Start
End
Fig. 4.
Comparison of quadrotor navigation trajectories under GNSS
multipath and latency: naive EKF, first-order online learning, and second-
order online learning.
As demonstrated in Figure 3, the belief state for second-
order online learning achieves faster convergence to a stable
trust level with reduced oscillation amplitude, while for first-
order online learning a persistent drift and higher variability
is observed. Trajectory comparisons in multipath-affected
urban regions (Fig. 4) show that the naive EKF deviates
from the planned path, particularly near waypoints located
close to obstacles with strong multipath effects. The resulting
unmitigated bias leads to degraded tracking of the reference
trajectory from the global planner and increases the risk
of unsafe navigation in obstacle-dense regions. First-order
online learning reduces the overall deviation but exhibits
delayed recovery and transient path-tracking errors, indicat-
ing limited responsiveness under degraded GNSS conditions.
In the second mission, this leads to temporary violations
of the planned path, as the controller relies primarily on
local gradient information without accounting for global path
constraints, as it moves out from the constrained airspace
region. In contrast, second-order online learning maintains
closer adherence to the planned trajectory and smoother mo-
tion through multipath-affected regions, consistently reach-
ing the goal without large deviations. These results suggest
that curvature-aware second-order belief adaptation provides
stable GNSS trust adjustment, leading to improved trajectory
tracking and robustness under geometry-dependent multi-
path and latency effects.
We further analyze the results
Naive EKF
Adaptive EKF
1st-order OBA
2nd-Order OBA
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Tracking Error (m)
Tracking Error Distribution Across Algorithms
Fig. 5.
Tracking error distribution across classical and adaptive Kalman
filter with respect to first and second order online learning methods over 10
mission profiles.
Naive EKF
Adaptive EKF
1st-Order OBA
2nd-Order OBA
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Estimation Error (m)
Estimation Error Distribution Across Algorithms
Fig. 6.
State estimation error distribution across classical and adaptive
Kalman filter with respect to first and second order online learning methods
over 10 mission profiles.
obtained across multiple mission profiles with different start
and goal locations in the urban airspace, selected to en-
sure convergence of the global planner used to generate
the reference waypoints. The improved belief stability of
second-order online learning in Fig. 3 directly translates
to better innovation stabilization leading to lower position
estimation and trajectory tracking errors as shown in Fig.
5 and 6. The naive EKF exhibits the largest median errors
and widest interquartile ranges, indicating high sensitivity
to multipath bias and delayed measurements that violate
its fixed-noise assumptions. The adaptive EKF reduces the
median error but shows increased variance and long-tailed
error distributions, reflecting reactive covariance tuning that
struggles under rapidly changing GNSS conditions. Heavier


tails observed in adaptive EKF reflect reactive covariance
inflation rather than structured trust adaptation. First-order
belief adaptation provides further improvement by explicitly
modulating GNSS trust; however, its error distribution re-
mains relatively dispersed, suggesting slower or inconsistent
adaptation across missions. In contrast, the proposed second-
order belief-adaptive method achieves the lowest median
estimation with 80% reduction in estimation errors and
30% reduction in tracking errors across 10 mission profiles,
demonstrating improved accuracy and consistency across
all evaluated trajectories. These results demonstrate that
curvature-aware adaptation reduces oscillatory trust updates,
stabilizes innovation energy, and yields consistent covariance
evolution across missions, even without modifying the un-
derlying EKF structure.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a belief-adaptive online autonomy
framework for quadrotor navigation under GNSS degrada-
tion, integrating second-order online learning with a bias-
augmented EKF and latency-aware measurement handling.
By modeling GNSS reliability as a latent belief and adapt-
ing it through curvature-aware updates, the method enables
stable sensor trust adjustment under geometry-dependent
multipath and latency effects while navigating in urban envi-
ronments. Simulation results show consistent improvements
over naive and adaptive EKF, and first-order learning in terms
of belief convergence, trajectory smoothness, and estimation
and tracking accuracy. The framework preserves the struc-
ture of classical GNSS–IMU fusion and can be integrated
into existing flight-control pipelines without offline training.
Future work will focus on validation in real-world flight trials
and extensions to multi-vehicle urban operations.
REFERENCES
[1]
O. K. Isik, I. Petrunin, and A. Tsourdos, “Machine learning-
based environment-aware gnss integrity monitoring for urban
air mobility.,” Drones (2504-446X), vol. 8, no. 11, 2024.
[2]
D. Fan, K. Guo, S. Lyu, X. Yu, L. Xie, and L. Guo,
“Quadrotor uav: Collision resilience behaviors,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 59, no. 3,
pp. 2092–2104, 2022.
[3]
C. Chi, X. Zhan, S. Wang, and Y. Zhai, “Enabling robust
and accurate navigation for uavs using real-time gnss precise
point positioning and imu integration,” The Aeronautical
Journal, vol. 125, no. 1283, pp. 87–108, 2021.
[4]
S. A. Negru et al., “Resilient time dissemination fusion
framework for uavs for smart cities,” Engineering Proceed-
ings, vol. 88, no. 1, p. 5, 2025.
[5]
P. Geragersian, I. Petrunin, W. Guo, and R. Grech, “Multi-
path detection from gnss observables using gated recurrent
unit,” in 2022 IEEE/AIAA 41st Digital Avionics Systems
Conference (DASC), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–7.
[6]
K. Gamagedara, T. Lee, and M. Snyder, “Quadrotor state
estimation with imu and delayed real-time kinematic gps,”
IEEE transactions on aerospace and electronic systems,
vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 2661–2673, 2021.
[7]
S. A. Negru, P. Geragersian, I. Petrunin, R. Grech, and
G. Buesnel, “Realism-oriented design, verification, and val-
idation of novel robust navigation solutions,” Engineering
Proceedings, vol. 54, no. 1, p. 57, 2023.
[8]
F. Qin, X. Zhan, and L. Zhan, “Performance assessment
of a low-cost inertial measurement unit based ultra-tight
global navigation satellite system/inertial navigation system
integration for high dynamic applications,” IET Radar, Sonar
& Navigation, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 828–836, 2014.
[9]
R. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Cheng, Y. Mao, and W. Y. Ochieng, “A
new imu-aided multiple gnss fault detection and exclusion
algorithm for integrated navigation in urban environments,”
GPS Solutions, vol. 25, no. 4, p. 147, 2021.
[10]
K. Iyer, A. Dey, B. Xu, N. Sharma, and L.-T. Hsu, “En-
hancing positioning in gnss denied environments based on
an extended kalman filter using past gnss measurements and
imu,” IEEE transactions on vehicular technology, vol. 73,
no. 6, pp. 7908–7924, 2024.
[11]
C. Yang, W. Shi, and W. Chen, “Correlational inference-
based adaptive unscented kalman filter with application
in gnss/imu-integrated navigation,” GPS solutions, vol. 22,
no. 4, p. 100, 2018.
[12]
Z. Gong et al., “Graph-based adaptive fusion of gnss and
vio under intermittent gnss-degraded environment,” IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 70,
pp. 1–16, 2020.
[13]
W. Li, D. Gong, M. Liu, J. Chen, and D. Duan, “Adaptive
robust kalman filter for relative navigation using global
position system,” IET Radar, Sonar & Navigation, vol. 7,
no. 5, pp. 471–479, 2013.
[14]
Z. Yin, J. Yang, Y. Ma, S. Wang, D. Chai, and H. Cui, “A
robust adaptive extended kalman filter based on an improved
measurement noise covariance matrix for the monitoring
and isolation of abnormal disturbances in gnss/ins vehicle
navigation,” Remote Sensing, vol. 15, no. 17, p. 4125, 2023.
[15]
C. Ma, S. Pan, W. Gao, H. Wang, and L. Liu, “Variational
bayesian-based robust adaptive filtering for gnss/ins tightly
coupled positioning in urban environments,” Measurement,
vol. 223, p. 113 668, 2023.
[16]
X. Yu, Z. Qu, and G. Jin, “Robust adaptive filters and
smoothers for linear systems with heavy-tailed multiplica-
tive/additive noises,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and
Electronic Systems, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 6717–6733, 2024.
[17]
T. E. Tabassum, Z. Xu, I. Petrunin, and Z. A. Rana,
“Integrating gru with a kalman filter to enhance visual
inertial odometry performance in complex environments,”
Aerospace, vol. 10, no. 11, p. 923, 2023.
[18]
P. Geragersian, I. Petrunin, W. Guo, and R. Grech, “An
ins/gnss fusion architecture in gnss denied environment using
gated recurrent unit,” in AIAA SCITECH 2022 Forum, 2022,
p. 1759.
[19]
D. K. Panda and W. Guo, “Action robust reinforcement learn-
ing for air mobility deconfliction against conflict induced
spoofing,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 2024.
[20]
R. W. Beard and T. W. McLain, Small unmanned aircraft:
Theory and practice. Princeton university press, 2012.
[21]
D. K. Panda, K. Halder, S. Das, and S. Townley, “Observer
based decentralized load frequency control with false data
injection attack for specified network quality and delay,”
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, vol. 186, p. 115 323, 2024.
[22]
S. Khanafseh et al., “Gnss multipath error modeling for auto-
motive applications,” in Proceedings of the 31st international
technical meeting of the satellite division of the institute of
navigation (ION GNSS+ 2018), 2018, pp. 1573–1589.
