1
Conflict-Predictive Variable Horizons in Multi-Drone
Distributed Model Predictive Control
Linda Mümken
 
 
, Michael Schwung
 
 
, Stefan Lier
 
 
, and Andreas Schwung
 
 
Abstract—In distributed model predictive control for multi-
drone collision avoidance, a fixed prediction horizon forces a
compromise: a short horizon is inexpensive but reacts late to
approaching neighbors, whereas a long one anticipates conflicts
at a per-step cost that grows superlinearly with its length. We
propose a conflict-predictive variable horizon that each drone
sets locally, leaving the distributed model predictive control
itself unchanged. From a short history of observed positions,
a drone extrapolates the flight lines of its neighbors, tests
each against its own using confidence funnels that narrow
with prediction range, and obtains each time to conflict in
closed form. The horizon is then the smallest admissible value
whose planning window covers the farthest predicted conflict. It
collapses to its minimum in clear airspace and grows only when
a conflict lies ahead. Provided this minimum meets a single
computable feasibility bound, we prove that recursive feasibility
and asymptotic stability are preserved for every horizon the
policy can select. These guarantees hold for a linear model, and
a cascaded inner loop reduces each quadrotor’s translational
dynamics to a perturbed double integrator, so they carry over
to the linearized quadrotor model and, as practical stability,
to the full nonlinear one. In simulation on dense antipodal-
swap benchmarks, the variable horizon reduces both per-step
solver cost and total computation well below those of a long
fixed horizon, and it maintains separation in every run, which
a short fixed horizon of comparable per-step cost does not.
Index Terms—Model predictive control, variable prediction
horizon, collision avoidance, distributed control
I. Introduction
Low-altitude airspace is becoming increasingly crowded
with autonomous drones used for delivery, inspection, and
monitoring, and traﬀic management frameworks antici-
pate dense beyond-visual-line-of-sight operations in shared
airspace volumes [1], [2]. Distributed model predictive
control (DMPC) is a natural fit for such traﬀic, because
each drone repeatedly optimizes its own trajectory over
a finite prediction horizon from the observed states of
its neighbors and enforces separation as a constraint [3],
The research project was funded by “The Ministry of the Envi-
ronment, Nature Conservation and Transport of the State of North
Rhine-Westphalia” in Germany and co-financed by the European
Union for the research project “SIDDA – Sustainable Intermodal
Drone Delivery Airline” with grant number IN-ML-1-013b.
L. Mümken and A. Schwung are with the Department of Au-
tomation Technology, South Westphalia University of Applied Sci-
ences, 59494 Soest, Germany (e-mail: muemken.linda@fh-swf.de;
schwung.andreas@fh-swf.de).
M. Schwung is with the Institute of Automation and Computer
Control, Ruhr University Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany (e-mail:
michael.schwung@rub.de).
S. Lier is with the Department of Logistics and Supply Chain
Management, South Westphalia University of Applied Sciences,
59872 Meschede, Germany (e-mail: lier.stefan@fh-swf.de).
[4]. The prediction horizon is the pivotal parameter. It
must reach far enough ahead to resolve an approaching
conflict before it becomes unavoidable, yet the per-step
optimization cost grows superlinearly with its length.
Conflicts, however, are intermittent and spatially sparse.
A drone spends most of its mission in clear airspace and
encounters others only briefly, yet a fixed horizon must
be sized for the worst case, so its cost falls on every step
even when no neighbor is near. This paper aims to design a
controller that only pays for anticipation when it predicts
an impending conflict, ensuring that its safety does not
depend on the accuracy of the prediction.
So far, the horizon has been treated as a constant,
sized once for the operating density and then paid for
at every step [5], [6]. Dynamic-horizon schemes do exist,
but none sizes the horizon to a predicted conflict while
keeping the feasibility and stability of the underlying
DMPC independent of that prediction (Section II).
We close this gap with a conflict-predictive variable
horizon that each drone sets locally. At every step, a
lightweight linear predictor extrapolates each neighbor’s
flight line from a short observation history, and the drone
tests that line against its own using a confidence funnel,
a tolerance tube that narrows as prediction confidence
decays. One closed-form evaluation per neighbor yields
the time to conflict, and the horizon becomes the small-
est admissible value whose planning window covers the
farthest of these times. In clear airspace it stays at its
minimum Hmin, and it reaches its maximum Hmax only
when a conflict is flagged at the far end of the window,
where the funnel is narrowest and only a close pass still
counts as an overlap.
The resulting controller decouples its guarantees from
the conflict prediction that drives it. We prove that
feasibility and asymptotic stability hold for every horizon
the policy can select, provided Hmin meets the computable
feasibility bound Hfeas
min, all without modifying the dis-
tributed controller itself. This rests on a property we
establish in the analysis. The horizon enters only through a
finite-horizon approximation residual, which we show stays
uniformly bounded over [Hmin, Hmax] and is absorbed
by a certificate depending solely on the drone’s physical
state. A misprediction therefore blunts anticipation and
costs eﬀiciency, never safety. To our knowledge, no other
dynamic-horizon scheme decouples its guarantees from the
adaptation signal in this way. The same perturbation
argument carries the guarantees to linearized quadrotor
dynamics and yields practical stability for the full nonlin-
arXiv:2609.13270v1  [cs.RO]  7 Sep 2026


2
ear model.
We make the following contributions:
• We introduce a variable-horizon DMPC that pre-
serves recursive feasibility and asymptotic stability
for every admissible horizon, under one computable
condition on Hmin.
• We extend these guarantees to quadrotor dynamics,
asymptotic for the linearized model and practical for
the full nonlinear one.
• We show on dense antipodal-swap benchmarks that
the variable horizon undercuts a long fixed horizon
in per-step and total computation, completes swaps
it cannot, and holds separation where a short fixed
horizon of comparable cost fails.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related work on horizon adaptation
and distributed MPC for collision avoidance. Section III
presents the conflict-predictive variable-horizon controller.
Section IV establishes recursive feasibility and asymptotic
stability under the variable horizon. Section V extends
the guarantees to linearized and nonlinear quadrotor
dynamics. Section VI reports the experimental evaluation,
and Section VII concludes.
II. Related Work
We review the two lines of work on which our scheme
builds and set out where it departs from each. The first
covers online adaptation of the prediction horizon and
the neighbor-motion prediction that feeds our policy. The
second covers distributed MPC for multi-drone collision
avoidance.
A. Variable Prediction Horizons
The prediction horizon fixes both the reach and the
per-step cost of the optimization. Many methods adapt
it online. What drives that adaptation is what separates
these methods from our horizon policy.
One option is to treat the horizon length as a decision
variable of the optimization itself [7], [8]. This couples
the horizon to the objective and typically turns the per-
step problem into a non-convex or mixed-integer program,
which inflates the very computation the adaptation is
meant to save. A less invasive alternative keeps the horizon
outside the optimization and adapts it through a stabiliz-
ing heuristic, growing or contracting it against a control-
Lyapunov or terminal-set criterion on the controlled sys-
tem’s own state [9], [10]. A third line avoids adaptation
altogether and fixes one long horizon that approximates
the infinite-horizon cost [11], and by construction pays for
that horizon at every step. Where these schemes adapt,
they size the horizon to a property of the controlled system
itself rather than, as in our work, to the geometry of an
approaching neighbor, and they contract it toward the
goal where ours expands it toward a conflict.
Data-driven schemes go further and learn the horizon,
mapping the current state to a length that trades tracking
against computation [12]. In the multi-robot case, a
learned policy sets a per-robot horizon, and an on-demand
rule preserves the avoidance constraints when that horizon
shrinks below the time to a detected conflict [13]. Our
policy reverses the direction of this coupling. A conflict
prediction is not a correction applied to a horizon set
elsewhere but the input that raises the horizon until the
planning window reaches the encounter, and the safety
argument never depends on that prediction being correct.
A learned policy also carries no closed-form guarantee, so
feasibility and stability must be argued separately and the
training repeated per task and per density.
The most closely related methods are event- and self-
triggered schemes, which only recompute the control when
a state or error condition demands it [14]–[16]. In these
methods, the trigger determines when to recompute and
which subsystem performs the computation. If a horizon
adapts, it contracts toward a terminal set. In contrast, our
policy determines how far to look ahead and expands the
horizon just as far as the time to the farthest predicted
encounter requires and contracts it again once the airspace
is clear.
Across these lines of work, the horizon is driven by the
controlled system’s own state while ours is driven by a
predicted encounter. It enters the stability analysis only
through a residual that stays uniformly bounded over the
admissible band.
To anticipate conflicts, a controller needs a model of
where its neighbors will go. The traditional approach
is constant-velocity extrapolation, which is employed in
velocity obstacles and their reciprocal variants to project
each drone along its current heading [17], [18]. More so-
phisticated predictors offer better anticipation at a higher
cost. Gaussian process and learned motion forecasts cap-
ture maneuvering neighbors [19], and chance-constrained
stochastic MPC pushes the predicted uncertainty into
the separation constraint to enforce a probabilistic safety
margin [20]. In all of these, forecast accuracy is safety-
critical, since an inaccurate forecast enters the avoidance
constraint directly and can void the separation it is
meant to enforce. We take the opposite stance and use
a deliberately lightweight linear predictor wrapped in
confidence funnels. Because feasibility and stability rest
on a prediction-independent lower bound on the horizon,
a misprediction degrades anticipation only. The funnel
construction pursues the trajectory-prediction direction
left open by the framework build from [6], and it admits
a learned predictor without affecting the guarantees.
B. Distributed MPC for Collision Avoidance
Distributed MPC solves the coupled multi-drone prob-
lem by letting each drone optimize its own trajectory based
on its neighbors’ latest plans [3], [21], [22], commonly
through dual decomposition or the Alternating Direc-
tion Method of Multipliers (ADMM) with Gauss–Seidel
sweeps [4], [23]. Stability without terminal ingredients is
then recovered either by contraction and self-organization
arguments [24] or by the long-horizon route described


3
above. Set-based safety encodings, such as control barrier
functions and their distributed and learned multi-agent
extensions [25]–[27], enforce separation through a forward-
invariant set rather than a receding-horizon constraint,
and are complementary to the horizon question studied
here.
We build on two foundations, namely the velocity-
dependent safety sphere and the sphere-packing bounds
that cap the attainable drone density resulting from the
geometric and control-theoretic capacity analysis in [5].
The adaptive safety zone DMPC, together with its fixed-
horizon feasibility and stability guarantees, comes from the
framework in [6], which combines a contraction argument
with a Lyapunov function based on physical energy and an
asynchronous Gauss–Seidel iteration. Our work turns the
horizon, the central cost parameter of this framework, over
to an online conflict-predictive policy. The step that makes
this admissible is our contribution. We show that the single
horizon-dependent residual in the analysis is uniformly
bounded over the admissible band, so the certificate
survives every horizon the policy selects. We then extend
the resulting guarantees beyond the double integrator to
linearized and full nonlinear quadrotor dynamics. The
adaptive radius and the underlying formulation carry over
unchanged.
III. Conflict-Predictive Variable-Horizon Control
Consider N drones sharing a bounded airspace Ω⊂R3,
indexed by i ∈{1, . . . , N}, each steering toward a goal
¯pi ∈Ω. Each drone observes time-stamped positions
of nearby drones through onboard sensing or broadcast
and stores them in a short rolling history. All neighbor
quantities, including velocities and adaptive radii, are
computed from these positions. The DMPC enforces col-
lision avoidance through velocity-dependent safety zones
and pairwise separation constraints. Its central parameter
is the prediction horizon H, which carries the short-versus-
long trade-off of Section I. A fixed horizon commits to one
side of that trade-off for the entire mission. Figure 1 shows
the proposed scheme across the drones, with the local loop
for every drone. The problem statement below specifies the
goals for the structure.
Problem. Design, for each drone i, a control law {ui(k)}
and a per-step prediction horizon Hi(k) such that:
(S) Safety: the pairwise separation ∥pi(t) −pj(t)∥≥
ri(t)
+
rj(t)
and
the
airspace
constraint
Bri(t)(pi(t))
⊂
Ω, with Br(p) the closed ball
of radius r centered at p, hold for all i̸ = j and
t ≥0.
(St) Stability: each drone converges to its goal, ∥pi(t) −
¯pi∥→0 as t →∞.
(E) Eﬀiciency: the horizon, and with it the per-step
optimization cost, is minimal among the admissi-
ble horizons whose planning window covers every
predicted conflict. In particular, Hi(k) = Hmin
whenever no conflict is predicted.
The controller is distributed by design. Each drone
solves its own problem based on the observed states of its
Shared airspace Ω
D1
D2
DN
pj
· · ·
· · ·
pT
Hp
MPC
pj
x1
ˆpj
H1
u1
pT
Hp
MPC
pj
x2
ˆpj
H2
u2
pT
Hp
MPC
pj
xN
ˆpj
HN
uN
Fig. 1. Proposed scheme on N drones sharing the airspace Ω. Each
drone observes the neighbor positions pj and runs the same local
loop. The predictor pT turns the observations into flight lines ˆpj, the
policy Hp sets the horizon Hi from the funnel conflict test, and the
DMPC turns the state xi into the control input ui. The horizon is the
only quantity that the scheme changes in the otherwise unchanged
DMPC. All signals are taken at step k.
neighbors, so the three requirements must be met locally,
without central coordination. The central diﬀiculty lies in
reconciling (E) with (S) and (St). A short horizon reduces
computation but may prevent the optimizer from resolving
an approaching conflict within its planning window. A long
horizon preserves safety but sacrifices the eﬀiciency gain.
A reactively chosen horizon must therefore never fall below
the value that keeps the controller feasible and stable, and
it must still collapse to a small value whenever the airspace
around the drone is clear.
We resolve this by separating the two roles of the
horizon. A fixed lower bound Hmin, verified once before
deployment, carries feasibility and stability. The conflict
prediction then selects a horizon within the admissible
band [Hmin, Hmax], whose upper bound caps the worst-
case per-step computation. The prediction therefore gov-
erns anticipation alone and cannot weaken the guarantees.
A horizon resting at the lower bound remains safe, not
because the airspace is clear, but because Hmin itself meets
the feasibility bound.
Section III-A recalls the dynamics, the adaptive safety
zone, and the DMPC formulation on which the scheme
builds. Section IV then establishes the guarantees of the
closed loop and condenses them into Theorem IV.7.
A. Preliminaries
Dynamics: Following the inner-loop time-scale sepa-
ration of a cascaded quadrotor controller [28], [29], the
translational motion of each drone reduces to a double
integrator with state xi = (pi, vi) ∈R3 × R3. With
sampling time ∆t > 0, the discretized dynamics over a


4
horizon step are
pi(s + 1) = pi(s) + ∆t vi(s) + 1
2∆t2 ui(s),
(1)
vi(s + 1) = vi(s) + ∆t ui(s),
subject to the acceleration and speed limits ∥ui(s)∥≤
Umax and ∥vi(s)∥≤Vmax, where Umax represents the
physical propulsion limits. The extension of all results
to the linearized and to the full nonlinear rigid-body
quadrotor model is established in Section V.
Adaptive safety zone: Each drone occupies a closed
safety sphere Bri(t)(pi) whose radius scales with the
braking distance [5],
ri(vi) = rmin + α ∥vi∥2
2Umax
,
(2)
with base radius rmin > 0 and adaptation parameter α ∈
(0, 1]. The radius is tight at low speed and expands at high
speed, so that slower drones occupy less airspace. Safety
requires the pairwise separation
∥pi(t) −pj(t)∥≥ri(t) + rj(t),
∀i̸ = j, ∀t.
(3)
Distributed model predictive control: At each decision
time k∆t, with s ≜k + h for h ∈{0, . . . , H −1},
drone i solves its own finite-horizon problem, minimizing
PH−1
h=0 [ℓ(xi(s), ui(s)) + λ∥vi(s)∥2] subject to the dynam-
ics (1), the actuation and speed bounds, the airspace
constraint Bri(s)(pi(s)) ⊂Ω, and the separation con-
straint (3) in which the neighbor positions are the pre-
dicted trajectories ˆpj, j ∈Ni. The stage cost ℓpenalizes
goal deviation and control effort, and λ > 0 weights a
velocity penalty that shrinks safety zones in congested
regions. The coupled problem over all drones is solved
by asynchronous ADMM–Gauss–Seidel iteration [4], [23],
each drone optimizing in turn from the predicted lines
ˆpj it has formed from its own observations. This DMPC
formulation and its fixed-horizon feasibility and stability
guarantees have been presented in [6]. We now extend the
results by adapting the horizon H.
B. Neighbor History and Linear Prediction
Each drone i maintains, for every observed neighbor j,
a rolling history of its measured positions over the most
recent L samples,
pj(k−L+1:k) ≜
 pj(k−L+1), . . . , pj(k)

.
(4)
A first-order least-squares fit of pj(k−L+1:k) yields the
current position estimate pj and a constant-velocity flight
line
ˆpj(τ) = pj + τ ˜vj,
τ ∈[0, tmax],
(5)
over the prediction window tmax = Hmax∆t, where Hmax
is the maximum admissible horizon introduced in Sec-
tion III-E. The predicted velocity inherits its direction
and speed from the fitted line, with the speed bounded
below at a fraction of the speed limit,
˜vj = ˆdj · max
 ˆvj, ν Vmax

,
ν ∈(0, 1],
(6)
with ˆdj the unit direction and ˆvj the fitted speed. No
velocity measurement of the neighbor is needed. The
lower bound νVmax keeps the prediction conservative
when a neighbor is momentarily slow or at rest, so that
latent conflicts are not masked by a vanishing relative
velocity. The ego drone’s own line ˆpi(τ) = pi + τ ˜vi
is formed analogously, with ˆdi taken from its reference
toward ¯pi. The history length L is a design parameter.
The present implementation uses L = 50 and computes
the fit (4)–(5) from the first observed position onward.
The extrapolation is deliberately lightweight, requiring
no model of a neighbor’s controller and admitting the
closed-form conflict test of Section III-D. The ego line
uses the reference direction rather than the drone’s own
previously planned MPC trajectory as it spans only the
previous horizon. Coordination therefore rests on observed
positions alone: no drone transmits its planned trajectory
or goal, and its mission intent stays private.
C. Confidence Funnels
Linear extrapolation is reliable in the near term but
degrades as τ grows, because neighbors maneuver and
the constant-velocity assumption decays. We therefore
propose to surround each predicted flight line with a
confidence funnel, a tube that narrows with prediction
time and whose radius sets the conflict-test tolerance. The
funnel weighs the uncertainty of the predicted trajectory
against the criticality of that uncertainty. Close to the
current time stamp, the prediction is reliable and an
encounter leaves little time to react, so the tolerance is
wide. Far ahead, the prediction is uncertain, but this
uncertainty is benign, because the encounter is distant
and the test is repeated at every step, so only a severe
predicted geometry flags a conflict. Let the progress along
the prediction window be σ(τ) = τ/tmax ∈[0, 1] and let
the initial radius at the funnel’s wide end be the maximum
safety radius rmax = rmin+αV 2
max/(2Umax), i.e., the largest
value the adaptive radius ri(vi) attains.
Definition III.1 (Confidence funnel radius). The confi-
dence funnel radius along a predicted flight line is
ψij(τ) = rf +
 rmax −rf

exp

−σ(τ)
cd

,
(7)
where the funnel lower bound rf = rj(ˆvj) is the neighbor’s
current adaptive radius (2) evaluated at the fitted speed,
and cd > 0 is the decay constant.
The funnel forms a cone that narrows along the neigh-
bor’s flight line, so the tolerance is wide and conservative
near the present and tight and selective far ahead, as
illustrated in Figure 2. The lower bound depends on the
neighbor’s state: a slow neighbor induces a tight far-
future tolerance, whereas a fast neighbor, whose radius
approaches rmax, retains a nearly uniform tube. The decay
constant cd trades sensitivity against false alarms: small
cd discounts distant predictions aggressively, whereas large
cd keeps the tube wide across the whole window.


5
Fig. 2. Confidence funnels in a four-drone swap (3D, color-coded).
Each funnel runs along a drone’s predicted flight line (dashed),
starting at the initial radius rmax and narrowing to the lower bound
rf (Definition III.1). Dotted lines trace the paths already flown. The
funnels shown are those predicted by a single drone, but as the
simulation shares positions by broadcast, every drone observes the
same histories and predicts the same funnels.
D. Conflict Detection
Given the two linear predictions, the conflict test re-
duces to a single closed-form evaluation per neighbor. Let
∆pij = pi −pj and ∆vij = ˜vi −˜vj denote the relative
position and velocity. The time of closest approach within
the prediction window minimizes ∥∆pij + τ ∆vij∥and is
obtained in closed form by clamping the unconstrained
minimizer to [0, tmax],
τ ∗
ij =





clamp

−∆p⊤
ij∆vij
∥∆vij∥2 , 0, tmax

,
∥∆vij∥> ϵ0,
0,
otherwise,
(8)
where ϵ0 > 0 guards against the singularity of paral-
lel motion. The closed form results from the classical
closest-point-of-approach test of the velocity-obstacle lit-
erature [17]. The corresponding miss distance, or gap, is
gij =
∆pij + τ ∗
ij ∆vij
.
(9)
Definition III.2 (Predicted conflict). Neighbor j is in
predicted conflict with drone i when the gap at closest
approach lies within the funnel evaluated at that instant,
gij ≤ψij
 τ ∗
ij

.
(10)
The set of conflicting neighbors of drone i is Ci = { j ∈
Ni : gij ≤ψij(τ ∗
ij) }.
The test in (10) is permissive for imminent encounters
and increasingly demanding for distant ones, exactly
matching the confidence of the linear prediction. This
behavior admits a precise statement.
Lemma III.3 (Funnel envelope). For all τ ∈[0, tmax], the
funnel radius (7) is nonincreasing in τ, strictly decreasing
whenever rf < rmax, and bounded by
rf + (rmax −rf) e−1/cd ≤ψij(τ) ≤rmax.
(11)
Consequently, the conflict test (10) flags every encounter
whose predicted gap lies within the neighbor’s current
adaptive radius, gij ≤rf = rj(ˆvj), at any prediction time,
while an encounter is tested against the widest tolerance
rmax only at τ ∗
ij = 0.
Proof. σ is increasing in τ and rf = rj(ˆvj) ≤rmax by (2)
with ˆvj ≤Vmax, so ψij is nonincreasing, strictly decreasing
for rf < rmax, with ψij(0) = rmax and ψij(tmax) = rf +
(rmax −rf)e−1/cd. In particular ψij(τ) ≥rf for all τ, so
gij ≤rf implies (10), and ψij(τ) = rmax only at τ = 0.
Lemma III.3 separates the two regimes the funnel
is designed for: a predicted violation of the neighbor’s
own safety zone is never discounted, no matter how far
ahead it occurs, whereas encounters outside that zone
are discounted more strongly the farther ahead they are
predicted.
E. Conflict-Driven Variable Horizon
We propose to set the prediction horizon based on the
time to conflict, so that the planning window covers every
predicted conflict but reaches no farther than necessary:
the horizon must span the predicted conflict, Hi∆t ≥τ ∗
ij,
clipped to a fixed admissible band [Hmin, Hmax]. Through-
out, admissible qualifies the horizon and means mem-
bership in this band, while constraint-admissible qualifies
states that satisfy the airspace and speed limits.
Definition III.4 (Variable-horizon policy). At decision time
k∆t, drone i selects the prediction horizon
Hi(k) =



clip

max
j∈Ci

τ ∗
ij/∆t

, Hmin, Hmax

,
Ci̸ = ∅,
Hmin,
Ci = ∅,
(12)
where 0 < Hmin ≤Hmax are fixed integer bounds.
The choice (12) is the cheapest admissible policy that
covers all predicted conflicts.
Proposition III.5 (Minimal covering horizon). Let Ci̸ = ∅.
The policy (12) covers every predicted conflict, Hi(k) ∆t ≥
τ ∗
ij for all j ∈Ci, and it is minimal: every integer horizon
H ∈[Hmin, Hmax] whose window covers all predicted
conflicts satisfies H ≥Hi(k). If Ci = ∅, the policy returns
the smallest admissible horizon Hmin.
Proof. By (8), τ ∗
ij ≤tmax = Hmax∆t, so ⌈τ ∗
ij/∆t⌉≤
Hmax and the upper clip in (12) is never active. Hence
Hi(k) = max{Hmin, maxj∈Ci⌈τ ∗
ij/∆t⌉} ≥τ ∗
ij/∆t for every
j ∈Ci, which is coverage. Conversely, an integer H with
H∆t ≥τ ∗
ij for all j ∈Ci satisfies H ≥maxj⌈τ ∗
ij/∆t⌉, and
admissibility requires H ≥Hmin, so H ≥Hi(k).


6
Algorithm 1 One control step of drone i at time k∆t
Require: histories {pj(k−L+1:k)}j∈Ni, goal ¯pi, previous
solution
1: fit the ego line ˆpi(·) (5)–(6); Ci ←∅
2: for each neighbor j ∈Ni do
3:
fit the flight line ˆpj(·) from the history (5)–(6)
4:
compute τ ∗
ij and gij (8)–(9)
5:
if gij ≤ψij(τ ∗
ij) (7), (10) then
6:
Ci ←Ci ∪{j}
7:
end if
8: end for
9: Hi(k) ←variable-horizon policy (12) from Ci
10: resize solver and ADMM state to Hi(k); pad or trim
the warm start
11: solve the local MPC of Section III-A; apply the first
input ui(k)
Since the per-step computational cost increases super-
linearly with the horizon (Section VI-B), Proposition III.5
shows that requirement (E) holds by construction rather
than by tuning. Since the relative travel to closest ap-
proach is ∥∆vij∥τ ∗
ij, a conflict that is distant in space
corresponds to a large τ ∗
ij and hence a long horizon and
early anticipation, whereas a near conflict yields a short
horizon and a fast reaction. The lower clip to Hmin is the
operative guarantee exploited in Section IV.
F. Integration into the Distributed MPC
The horizon (12) is the only quantity the scheme exposes
to the controller. At each step, drone i recomputes Hi(k)
from the current history and resizes its local solver and
ADMM state to Hi(k) before the optimization. Warm
starts from the previous step are padded or truncated
to the new length to preserve solver eﬀiciency across
horizon changes. This leaves the cost, the constraints, and
the iteration scheme of the DMPC unchanged: a solver
invoked with a constant horizon recovers the fixed-horizon
controller exactly.
One control step proceeds as in Algorithm 1. It mirrors
the block structure of Figure 1.
Throughout the analysis we require the lower bound to
meet the feasibility condition of the underlying controller,
which is the only condition the variable horizon has to
respect.
Assumption III.6 (Feasible minimum horizon). The lower
bound of Definition III.4 satisfies Hmin ≥Hfeas
min, where
Hfeas
min =
 1
∆t
r
2rminα
Umax

(13)
is the minimum prediction horizon for per-step solver fea-
sibility of the underlying MPC at the operating density [6].
Note that Assumption III.6 constrains only the constant
Hmin, not the time-varying horizon, and is verified once
from the airspace and dynamics parameters. Hence, every
horizon produced by (12) lies in [Hfeas
min, Hmax], which, as
Section IV shows, is suﬀicient to preserve the feasibility
and stability guarantees of the underlying controller.
IV. Feasibility and Stability of the Variable-Horizon
DMPC
The fixed-horizon adaptive DMPC of [6] is proven feasi-
ble and stable for any constant admissible horizon under
per-step solver feasibility, a property we make explicit
in Section IV-D. These results do not simply transfer
to a horizon that changes from step to step. Standard
MPC arguments certify stability with the optimal value
function, which depends on the horizon length, so a switch
could break the descent between two steps, and recursive
feasibility via the shifted previous solution presumes that
consecutive problems share their length. The goal of this
section is to prove feasibility and asymptotic stability for
the conflict-driven horizon of Section III, which is drawn
at every step from the admissible band [Hmin, Hmax] as in
Definition III.4. Two steps make this possible. We work
with a certificate that is a Lyapunov function of the
physical state alone and therefore does not change when
the horizon does, and we prove that the single horizon-
dependent quantity in the analysis, a finite-horizon resid-
ual, is uniformly bounded over the band. We first recall
the fixed-horizon guarantees (Section IV-A), cast their
stability argument as a single perturbation bound (Sec-
tion IV-B), and fix the horizon bounds (Section IV-C). We
then establish feasibility and asymptotic stability under
the variable horizon (Section IV-D), before isolating the
principle that safety is decoupled from prediction accuracy
(Section IV-E). Section V lifts every result to quadrotor
dynamics.
A. Fixed-Horizon DMPC Guarantees
We summarize the results of [6] on which the analysis
builds. To this end, we recall the necessary propositions,
for their proofs see [6]. The geometric capacity of the
airspace under the adaptive radius (2) follows from the
three-dimensional sphere-packing bound [5]: with δ3 =
π/
√
18 ≈0.74 the optimal packing density, the maximum
drone count at radius r is Nc(r) = ⌊δ3 vol(Ω)/( 4
3πr3)⌋,
and the critical adaptive density is
N v
c = Nc(rmin + ε) =

δ3 ·
vol(Ω)
4
3π(rmin + ε)3

,
(14)
with ε > 0 arbitrarily small. The horizon required for the
solver to plan beyond a neighbor’s safety zone is likewise
bounded below [6]: under N ≤N v
c , a feasible trajectory
exists only if H ≥Hfeas
min, the bound (13) already stated
in Assumption III.6, computable in closed form from the
base radius, the adaptation parameter, the acceleration
limit, and the sampling time. Stability rests on a Lyapunov
function defined on the physical state, and therefore one
that does not change with the prediction horizon,
V (x) =
N
X
i=1
h
∥pi −¯pi∥2 + γ∥vi∥2 + δ
 r2
i (t) −r2
min
i
,
(15)


7
with γ, δ > 0 and equilibrium value V (x⋆) = 0 at x⋆=
{(¯pi, 0)}N
i=1. Near the goal, the separation constraints are
inactive and the adaptive radii contract to rmin, so each
drone’s local subproblem reduces to the unconstrained
linear–quadratic regulator (LQR). This yields the nom-
inal feedback that drives V downward. Throughout, the
Lyapunov analysis is carried out in continuous time for the
sample-and-hold closed loop, following [6]: the zero-order-
hold mismatch between sampling instants is a bounded
feedback perturbation of order O(∆t) that vanishes near
equilibrium and is absorbed by the perturbation bound of
Section IV-B.
Proposition IV.1 (Nominal Lyapunov Descent [6]). Sup-
pose α < αc = 2rminUmax/V 2
max and N < N v
c . Under
the LQR feedback ulqr
i
= −Kp(pi −¯pi) −Kvvi with
Kp, Kv > 0, the closed loop satisfies
˙V ≤−cp
N
X
i=1
∥pi −¯pi∥2 −cv
N
X
i=1
∥vi∥2 ≤−λminV,
(16)
with cp, cv, λmin > 0 independent of the prediction hori-
zon.
The finite-horizon DMPC realizes this feedback only
approximately, and only up to the coupling between
neighboring subproblems. Both deviations are collected
in a single perturbation term.
Proposition IV.2 (Perturbed LQR Approximation [6]). At
the fixed point of the distributed iteration with horizon
H, each local DMPC solution takes the form
u∗
i = ulqr
i
+ ei,
ei = ρi(H) + ηi,
(17)
where ρi(H) is the finite-horizon approximation residual
and ηi is the coupling perturbation with ∥ηi∥≤Cβ,
C > 0 depending on the constraint geometry and β < 1
the contraction rate of the distributed update map. Both
terms vanish as the system approaches equilibrium.
Over the constraint-admissible set Ω× {∥vi∥≤Vmax}
the residual is moreover uniformly bounded, ∥ρi(H)∥≤
¯ρ < ∞for every H, since every feasible input satisfies
∥u∗
i ∥≤Umax and the LQR feedback is bounded on this
compact set.
B. A Perturbation Bound for the Adaptive DMPC
The stability of the DMPC, and of all its extensions
in this paper, follows from a single observation: the
nominal descent of Proposition IV.1 tolerates any bounded
perturbation of the feedback, in the sense of input-to-state
stability (ISS), with an ultimate bound proportional to the
perturbation size.
Lemma IV.3 (ISS under Bounded Feedback Perturbation).
Let α < αc and N < N v
c , and suppose each drone applies
ui = ulqr
i
+ ei with supi ∥ei∥≤¯e. Then along the closed
loop
˙V ≤−cp
N
X
i=1
∥pi −¯pi∥2 −
N
X
i=1
∥vi∥
 cv∥vi∥−2γeﬀ¯e

(18)
≤−cp
N
X
i=1
∥pi −¯pi∥2 + N(γeﬀ¯e)2
cv
,
(19)
with γeﬀ
=
γ + δαrmax/Umax and rmax
=
rmin +
αV 2
max/(2Umax). Consequently
˙V
< 0 outside the set
{maxi ∥vi∥≤2γeﬀ¯e/cv}, so the closed loop is practically
asymptotically stable with ultimate bound O(¯e). If ¯e →0
as the state approaches equilibrium, the equilibrium is
asymptotically stable.
Proof. Substituting ui
=
ulqr
i
+ ei into
˙V
and us-
ing the differentiation of (15) from [6], the nominal
terms give the descent (16), while each ei contributes
2(γ + δαri/Umax) v⊤
i ei. Bounding ri ≤rmax and applying
the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality with ∥ei∥≤¯e yields
the perturbation term 2γeﬀ¯e P
i ∥vi∥, hence (18). Each
velocity summand is negative once ∥vi∥> 2γeﬀ¯e/cv, and
maximizing it over ∥vi∥gives (19). Together with the
negative-definite position term this gives ˙V < 0 outside
an O(¯e) neighborhood of the equilibrium. When ¯e →0
along trajectories approaching the goal, the radius of this
neighborhood shrinks to zero and asymptotic stability
follows.
Applying Lemma IV.3 to the genuine DMPC feed-
back (17) recovers the fixed-horizon stability result of [6]
as its first special case.
Corollary IV.4 (Stability of the Adaptive DMPC). Under
α < αc, N < N v
c , H ≥Hfeas
min, and the coupling condition
β < βc =
cv
γeﬀC ,
(20)
the fixed-horizon adaptive DMPC with asynchronous
Gauss–Seidel updates is asymptotically stable about
{(¯pi, 0)}N
i=1.
Proof. By Proposition IV.2 the realized feedback is ulqr
i
+
ei with ei = ρi(H) + ηi, so ¯e ≤supi ∥ρi(H)∥+ Cβ.
Lemma IV.3 gives practical stability with ultimate bound
O(¯e). Since ρi(H) and ηi both vanish as the system ap-
proaches equilibrium, ¯e →0 and the asymptotic stability
follows. The condition β < βc is exactly 2γeﬀCβ < 2cv,
ensuring the coupling contribution is dominated by the
velocity dissipation.
C. Choice of the Horizon Bounds
The
variable
horizon
is
confined
to
the
band
[Hmin, Hmax] fixed once before deployment, and only the
lower bound enters the guarantees. The minimum is
chosen to meet the feasibility requirement (13), Hmin ≥
Hfeas
min. The maximum Hmax sets the prediction window
tmax
= Hmax∆t over which conflicts are anticipated


8
and caps the worst-case per-step computation. It affects
neither feasibility nor stability and need only satisfy
Hmin ≤Hmax < ∞. A conflict beyond tmax is simply
detected at a later step once it enters the window, while
the lower bound Hmin keeps every window long enough
for a braking maneuver (13). A larger Hmax yields earlier
anticipation at higher peak cost. We therefore treat both
bounds as fixed design constants meeting Assumption III.6
and carry no further assumption on the horizon into the
analysis.
D. Feasibility and Stability under the Variable Horizon
The variable horizon threatens feasibility at exactly one
point. When the horizon grows between steps, the shifted
previous solution falls short of the new subproblem’s
length, and since the framework carries no terminal set, no
terminal controller is available to extend it in the standard
way. This subsection establishes that feasibility survives
every admissible horizon change nonetheless. From [6] we
import two facts. A collision-free configuration exists at
density N ≤N v
c
by the packing bound [5], and per-
step solver feasibility holds for every constant horizon
H ≥Hfeas
min (13), which we state as Assumption IV.5. What
we prove is that the time-varying horizon preserves this
property, constructively via the truncated shift when the
horizon shrinks (Lemma IV.6) and by Assumption IV.5
when it grows.
Assumption IV.5 (Per-step fixed-horizon feasibility). At
density N < N v
c , each drone’s fixed-horizon subproblem
is feasible from every constraint-admissible state reached
in closed loop, for every constant horizon H ≥Hfeas
min [6].
Lemma IV.6 (Admissible-Horizon Feasibility). Let N <
N v
c , Assumption III.6, and Assumption IV.5 hold. Then
each drone’s subproblem is feasible for every H
∈
[Hmin, Hmax], and the one-step-shifted previous solution,
truncated to any H′ ∈[Hmin, H −1], remains a feasible
point of the shorter subproblem.
Proof. Every H ∈[Hmin, Hmax] satisfies H ≥Hfeas
min by
Assumption III.6, so feasibility at each step is Assump-
tion IV.5. The constraints are stage-wise, so the length-
H′ prefix of the shifted feasible trajectory satisfies all
constraints of the horizon-H′ subproblem.
The Lyapunov function (15) depends only on the
physical state, and the perturbation bound of Lemma IV.3
depends on the horizon only through the residual ρi(H)
of Proposition IV.2. Since that residual is bounded by ¯ρ
uniformly in the horizon over the constraint-admissible
set, its worst case over the band is ¯ρ, uniformly in
time. This is why the time-varying horizon preserves the
guarantees.
Theorem IV.7 (Feasibility and Stability under the Variable
Horizon). Let N < N v
c and let Assumption III.6 and
Assumption IV.5 hold. Then for every horizon sequence
{Hi(k)}k≥0 ⊂[Hmin, Hmax] produced by Definition III.4,
the distributed adaptive MPC is feasible at every step.
If in addition α < αc and β < βc as in Corollary IV.4,
the closed loop with asynchronous Gauss–Seidel updates
is asymptotically stable about {(¯pi, 0)}N
i=1.
Proof. Feasibility: Feasibility at every step follows for any
horizon sequence, using only that every selected horizon
lies in the band [Hmin, Hmax]. Each step is thus a fixed-
horizon subproblem at Hi(k), feasible at N < N v
c by
Lemma IV.6.
Horizon changes between steps affect only the warm
start. Shifting drone i’s step-k solution forward gives
a feasible length-(Hi(k)−1) trajectory (Lemma IV.6),
truncated when Hi(k+1) is shorter and padded when it is
longer. The longer subproblem is feasible by Lemma IV.6.
The padded warm start only initializes the solver and
carries no feasibility burden. This is the warm-start
handling of Section III-F. The argument applies to each
drone individually, and the Gauss–Seidel contraction of
Corollary IV.4 is a per-step property, so convergence to a
feasible fixed point is unaffected.
Stability: On each sampling interval the active horizon
is a fixed value Hi(k) ∈[Hmin, Hmax], so the realized
feedback is ulqr
i
+ ei with ei = ρi(Hi(k)) + ηi as in (17).
Because the residual bound ¯ρ is uniform in the horizon,
∥ρi(Hi(k))∥≤¯ρ for every admissible horizon, uniformly
over the constraint-admissible set, so ¯e ≤¯ρ+Cβ uniformly
in i and k. This bound is independent of which horizon the
policy selects, and Lemma IV.3 therefore applies with a
single ¯e on every interval, using the common, horizon-free
Lyapunov function (15). In particular, because V does
not depend on the horizon, it is continuous across the
switching instants, and a switch merely moves ρi within
the fixed bound. No dwell-time condition is therefore
needed. Far from equilibrium, feasibility at every step
holds as established above, and the speed and airspace con-
straints confine each trajectory to the compact constraint-
admissible set, on which ¯e is finite and uniform in time.
By (19), V decreases strictly until the trajectory enters
an O(¯e) neighborhood of the goal configuration. There
ρi and ηi vanish as the state approaches equilibrium
(Proposition IV.2), so ¯e contracts and the radius of the
neighborhood shrinks to zero. Asymptotic stability follows
as in Corollary IV.4.
Remark IV.8 (Variable horizon and the coupling condi-
tion). We expect the coupling margin to improve rather
than degrade under the variable horizon. Enlarging the
horizon precisely when a conflict is anticipated lets the
controller resolve it earlier and with weaker constraint
activation, which in practice weakens the coupling between
neighboring subproblems and thus reduces the contraction
rate β of Proposition IV.2. We do not formalize this link,
and the guarantees of Theorem IV.7 do not rely on it.
E. Decoupling of Safety from Prediction Accuracy
A central feature of the construction is that The-
orem
IV.7
invokes
the
predictor
of
Section
III-B–
Section III-D only through the lower bound Assump-
tion III.6. None of the proofs assumes that the linear


9
prediction is correct, that the funnel captures the true
conflict, or that the conflict set Ci is complete. Whatever
horizon Definition III.4 returns lies in [Hmin, Hmax], and
that membership alone carries the guarantees.
Corollary IV.9 (Robustness to Misprediction). The guar-
antees of Theorem IV.7 hold for any horizon policy
with range in [Hmin, Hmax] under Assumption III.6 and
Assumption IV.5, irrespective of the prediction model, the
history length L, or the funnel parameters cd, ν.
This robustness concerns feasibility and stability, not
the separation margin. A predictor that never reports
a conflict keeps the horizon at Hmin and retains the
guarantees under Assumption III.6 and Assumption IV.5,
but the drones then pass closer to the contact boundary
(Section VI-C). Prediction quality thus governs eﬀiciency
rather than safety: it selects which horizon in the certified
band is used, trading computation against anticipation.
The link to anticipation is made precise by the conflict-
resolution budget of [5]: with the per-lane headway
hmin = 2r/Vmax + Vmax/Umax, a horizon H resolves up
to κ(H) = ⌊H∆t/hmin⌋sequential conflicts. A conflict
predicted at time to conflict τ ∗
ij raises the horizon to at
least ⌈τ ∗
ij/∆t⌉by (12), enlarging κ exactly where a conflict
must be scheduled, while a clear neighborhood keeps
H = Hmin and the per-step cost minimal. A misprediction
can only waste budget, through an unnecessarily long or
short horizon within the band. It never violates safety.
V. Extension to Quadrotor Dynamics
The analysis so far uses the double-integrator model (1).
We now extend all results to two higher-fidelity quadrotor
models: the linearization about hover (Section V-A) and
the full nonlinear rigid body (Section V-B). In both cases
a cascaded inner–outer-loop controller reduces the trans-
lational dynamics to a perturbed double integrator, and
each model instantiates the bound ¯e of Lemma IV.3 with
a concrete residual. The extension is therefore immediate,
and because Lemma IV.3 is horizon-uniform, it carries
the variable horizon along unchanged. The two models
are representatives of a class rather than endpoints: the
analysis covers any copter model whose additional effects
perturb the translational loop by a bounded residual, a
point we make precise at the end of Section V-B.
A. Linearized Quadrotor with Cascaded Control
A quadrotor has state xquad = (p⊤, v⊤, Θ⊤, ω⊤)⊤∈
R12 with Euler angles Θ = (ϕ, θ, ψ)⊤and body rates ω.
Linearizing the rigid-body equations about hover (v = 0,
Θ = 0, ω = 0, T = mg) yields the linear time-invariant
system
˙xquad = A xquad + B uquad,
(21)
with input uquad = (δT, τϕ, τθ, τψ)⊤and the well-known
decoupled channel structure [28]
A =




03
I3
03
03
03
03
G
03
03
03
03
I3
03
03
03
03



,
B =




03×4
Bv
03×4
Bω



,
(22)
where
G =


0
g
0
−g
0
0
0
0
0

,
Bv =


0
0
1/m

e⊤
1 ,
Bω = diag

1
Ixx ,
1
Iyy ,
1
Izz
  03×1
I3

,
(23)
with gravitational acceleration g, mass m, and principal
moments of inertia Ixx, Iyy, Izz. The matrix G captures
the gravity coupling: a small pitch θ produces a horizontal
acceleration gθ and a small roll ϕ produces −gϕ. The
horizontal channels (x, ˙x, θ, q) and (y, ˙y, ϕ, p) each have
relative degree four from the torque inputs, and the
vertical channel (z, ˙z) relative degree two from the thrust
input, as derived for an experimental quadrotor in [30],
so the position channels are controllable and feedback-
linearizable [29].
Standard quadrotor practice [30], [31] uses a cascaded
architecture: a fast inner-loop attitude controller of band-
width ωi ≫1/∆t tracks the commanded attitude, Θ(t) ≈
Θcmd(t) with time constant τi ≪∆t, while the outer loop
is the position DMPC. Under time-scale separation [29],
the translational dynamics reduce to
¨pi = ui + ξi(t),
∥ξi(t)∥≤¯ξ = O(τi/∆t) ≪1,
(24)
that is, the double integrator (1) perturbed by the
bounded inner-loop residual ξi. We write ˜Umax = Umax−¯ξ
for the effective acceleration available to the outer loop.
Feasibility carries over with Umax replaced by ˜Umax:
the density bound N v
c
(14) is purely geometric and
unchanged, the minimum horizon becomes
˜Hfeas
min
=
⌈1
∆t
q
2rminα/ ˜Umax ⌉, i.e., the bound (13) with ˜Umax, and
the admissible-horizon feasibility of Lemma IV.6 carries
over under the reduced acceleration. Stability follows
directly from the perturbation lemma.
Theorem V.1 (DMPC Stability under Linearized Quadro-
tor Dynamics). Consider the adaptive DMPC with the
linearized quadrotor dynamics (21) and cascaded con-
trol (24). Under α < ˜αc = 2rmin ˜Umax/V 2
max, N < N v
c ,
H ≥˜Hfeas
min, and the combined perturbation condition
Cβ + ¯ξ <
cv
2γeﬀ
,
(25)
the closed loop is asymptotically stable about {(¯pi, 0)}N
i=1.
Proof. With the cascaded controller the realized feedback
is ulqr
i
+ ei, where now ei = ρi(H) + ηi + ξi collects the
finite-horizon residual, the distributed coupling, and the
inner-loop residual (24). By Proposition IV.2 and (24),
¯e ≤¯ρ + Cβ + ¯ξ. Lemma IV.3, with Umax replaced by
˜Umax throughout, gives (19), hence ˙V < 0 outside an O(¯e)
neighborhood. Condition (25) places that neighborhood


10
inside the region where the velocity dissipation dominates
the perturbation. The residuals ρi and ηi vanish near
equilibrium. So does ξi, since ∥vi∥→0 forces ∥˙Θcmd∥→0
and the inner-loop residual is driven by the command
rate. The ultimate bound therefore shrinks to zero and
the equilibrium is asymptotically stable. The coupling and
inner-loop perturbations enter ¯e additively, hence consume
the stability margin additively.
In practice, modern flight controllers run attitude loops
at 50–200 Hz and position MPC at 10–50 Hz, giving
τi/∆t ≤0.1 and hence a residual ¯ξ that is a small fraction
of Umax. Condition (25) is then satisfied by a wide margin,
and ˜αc ≈αc, ˜Hfeas
min ≈Hfeas
min.
B. Nonlinear Rigid-Body Quadrotor
The full nonlinear model has translational and rota-
tional dynamics [28], [30]
m ¨p = −mg e3 + T R e3,
(26)
J ˙ω = −ω × (J ω) + τ,
(27)
with R ∈SO(3) the body-to-inertial rotation, T the total
thrust, J the inertia matrix, and τ the body torque. This
adds two complications relative to the double integrator:
the translational acceleration depends on R, which evolves
on the manifold SO(3), and the input-to-acceleration
map is nonlinear in the attitude. Both are handled by
establishing ISS of the attitude loop and then bounding
the resulting translational perturbation.
Lemma V.2 (ISS of the Attitude Loop). Consider the
rotational dynamics (27) under an attitude controller
τ
= τ(Θ, ω, Θcmd) that exponentially stabilizes the
equilibrium ( ˜Θ, ω) = (0, 0) of the attitude error dynamics,
˜Θ = Θ −Θcmd, uniformly in the command, on the
operating region ∥Θ∥≤Θmax < π/2. Then the attitude
error is locally input-to-state stable with respect to the
command rate: there exist a class-KL function βa and a
class-K function γa with
∥Θ(t) −Θcmd(t)∥≤βa
 ∥Θ(0) −Θcmd(0)∥, t

+ γa

sup
0≤s≤t
∥˙Θcmd(s)∥

.
(28)
Proof. On the operating region, an exponentially stable
equilibrium under an additive Lipschitz perturbation is
ISS with a linear gain [29, Lem. 4.6, local version Lem. 4.7].
Here the perturbation is −˙Θcmd, which the command
motion adds to ˙˜Θ, so (28) holds with γa linear.
The exponential-stability hypothesis is met near hover
by the standard PD [30], quaternion-based, and geomet-
ric [32] attitude controllers.
Writing the translational dynamics (26) as a perturbed
double integrator, ¨p = unom + ξnl, the nonlinear residual
is
ξnl = T
m
 R(Θ) e3 −R(Θcmd) e3

+
  T
m R(Θcmd) e3 −g e3 −unom

,
(29)
whose first term is the attitude tracking error and whose
second is the thrust/attitude inversion mismatch. The
cascaded controller extracts the command (T, Θcmd) from
the nominal acceleration by exact thrust-vector inversion,
exploiting the differential flatness of the quadrotor [33],
T = m ∥unom + g e3∥,
R(Θcmd) e3 =
unom + g e3
∥unom + g e3∥,
(30)
with yaw commanded constant, well defined since Umax <
g keeps the commanded thrust vector away from zero.
It also discharges the operating-region hypothesis of
Lemma V.2: since unom + g e3 lies in the ball of radius
Umax around g e3, the commanded tilt under (30) never
exceeds arcsin(Umax/g), below 18◦for the parameters of
Section VI. The bound Θmax therefore follows from the
controller parameters rather than standing as a sepa-
rate assumption: arcsin(Umax/g) plus the tracking-error
bound of (28) suﬀices, and stays below π/2 whenever
the inner loop holds the tracking error within the margin
π/2−arcsin(Umax/g). Under (30) the second term of (29)
vanishes identically. By Lemma V.2, the smoothness of
R(·) with Lipschitz constant LR, and T/m ≤g + Umax,
∥ξnl(t)∥≤¯ξnl
 ∥Θ(0)∥, t

+ (g + Umax) LR γa

sup
s ∥˙Θcmd(s)∥

,
(31)
with ¯ξnl a decaying transient. In steady state, ∥ξnl∥∞≤
(g + Umax) LR γa(∥˙Θcmd∥∞).
Theorem V.3 (DMPC Stability under Nonlinear Quadro-
tor Dynamics). Consider the adaptive DMPC with the
nonlinear rigid-body dynamics (26)–(27) and a cascaded
controller satisfying Lemma V.2 with the command ex-
traction (30). Under the conditions of Theorem V.1 with
¯ξ replaced by ∥ξnl∥∞, the closed loop is practically
asymptotically stable about {(¯pi, 0)}N
i=1, converging to
a neighborhood of radius O(∥ξnl∥∞). If the inner loop
achieves asymptotically exact tracking (∥ξnl∥∞→0 as
∥vi∥→0), the stability is asymptotic.
Proof. The feedback deviation is ei = ρi(H) + ηi + ξnl,i,
so ¯e ≤¯ρ + Cβ + ∥ξnl∥∞and Lemma IV.3 gives (19), i.e.,
practical asymptotic stability with ultimate bound O(¯e).
The structure is identical to Theorem V.1 with ξnl in
place of ξ. Near equilibrium, ∥vi∥→0 forces ∥˙Θcmd∥→
0, hence ∥ξnl∥→0 by (31). The perturbation is self-
extinguishing, and exact asymptotic stability is recovered
by the cascade argument for ISS systems [29, Ch. 4].
The rigid-body model (26)–(27) is deliberately the min-
imal member of its model class: it isolates the two effects
that separate a quadrotor from the double integrator, and
every higher-fidelity effect enters the analysis similarly.
Experimentally identified copter models refine it with
first-order motor lag, aerodynamic drag, and gyroscopic
rotor torques [30], [34]. Under the cascaded controller, each
of these effects contributes a further bounded term to ξnl
in (29), the motor lag by the same time-scale separation
as the attitude loop and the drag through the speed


11
TABLE I
Feedback perturbation bound across the three model classes.
Model
¯e
Double integrator
¯ρ + Cβ
Linearized quadrotor
¯ρ + Cβ + ¯ξ
Nonlinear quadrotor
¯ρ + Cβ + ∥ξnl∥∞
bound Vmax, so only the constant ¯e of Table I changes,
not the argument. That real inner loops deliver such
residuals, small and certifiable in advance, is documented
across control architectures: a cascaded flatness-based
design tracks within a precomputed bound under wind
disturbances [30], incremental nonlinear dynamic inver-
sion holds centimeter-level errors in aggressive flight [35],
and drag-compensated flatness sustains accurate high-
speed tracking [36]. Any of these controllers satisfies the
hypothesis of Lemma V.2 and can serve as the inner loop,
with the DMPC as supervisor unchanged.
The extension relies on the receding-horizon framework
rather than on the specific plant. MPC for nonlinear
systems is stable provided the optimization is feasible
at every step (guaranteed by Theorem IV.7), stability is
enforced through a terminal ingredient [37] or a suﬀiciently
long horizon [11] (here H ≥˜Hfeas
min), and the system is con-
trollable near the equilibrium. The linearized quadrotor is
controllable by construction, and the nonlinear quadrotor
inherits local controllability from its linearization, so
the framework applies, with our perturbation analysis
supplying the explicit convergence rate and parameter
bounds.
Corollary V.4 (Variable Horizon under Quadrotor Dy-
namics). Under the conditions of Theorem V.1 and The-
orem V.3, respectively, Assumption IV.5, and Assump-
tion III.6 with Hfeas
min replaced by
˜Hfeas
min, the variable-
horizon DMPC of Definition III.4 retains recursive fea-
sibility and (practical) asymptotic stability under both
quadrotor models.
Proof. Theorem V.1 and Theorem V.3 establish stability
through Lemma IV.3, whose only horizon dependence is
the residual ρi(H) of Proposition IV.2, bounded by ¯ρ
uniformly over the admissible band, and the admissible-
horizon feasibility of Lemma IV.6 holds under ˜Umax. The
argument of Theorem IV.7 therefore applies verbatim.
Across the three model classes, the only quantity that
changes is the feedback perturbation ¯e that Lemma IV.3
absorbs. Table I lists the three bounds. Everything else
carries over: the critical density N v
c
and the variable-
horizon results of Section IV are inherited unchanged,
and the critical growth rate retains its form with the
tightened acceleration reserve, ˜αc = 2rmin ˜Umax/V 2
max.
Stability is asymptotic for the double integrator and the
linearized quadrotor. For the nonlinear quadrotor it is
practical, becoming asymptotic as the inner-loop residual
extinguishes near equilibrium (Theorem V.3).
VI. Evaluation
We evaluate whether the conflict-predictive variable
horizon achieves eﬀiciency gains without compromising
the guarantees of Section IV, and how it positions the
drones in relation to the contact boundary. We com-
pare three horizon strategies under the same distributed
controller: a short fixed horizon held at the minimum,
Hmin, a long fixed horizon held at the maximum, Hmax,
and a conflict-predictive variable horizon ranging over
[Hmin, Hmax]. This section describes the benchmark (Sec-
tion VI-A), then examines the cost of computing the
variable horizon (Section VI-B), how closely it allows
drones to approach one another (Section VI-C), and the
regime in which each effect dominates (Section VI-D).
A. Benchmark Setup
The scenarios are antipodal swaps, in which every drone
flies to the diametrically opposite point through the center
of the airspace. This produces a dense, conflict-heavy
crossing at mid-flight, preceded and followed by clear
airspace. This is exactly the regime that the variable hori-
zon targets. The matrix spans drone counts N ∈{2, 4, 8}
and tight (53 m3) and open (203 m3) cubic airspace, giving
six scenarios. The safety model is the adaptive radius of
the framework with a minimum radius of rmin = 0.4 m
and growth rate α = 0.25. The speed and acceleration
limits are Vmax = 3.0 m/s and Umax = 3.0 m/s2, and
the sampling time is ∆t = 0.1 s. These values satisfy
the stability bound α < αc = 2rminUmax/V 2
max = 0.27,
so the experiments instantiate the system analyzed in
Section IV. Figure 3 gives an overview of the resulting
closed-loop motion. The swaps are fully three-dimensional.
In the open scenarios the drones hold their direct lines and
deviate only around the central crossing, whereas the tight
scenarios keep them on detours for most of the flight.
The variable horizon ranges from Hmin = 4 to Hmax =
10, and the two fixed baselines run at its endpoints. With
these parameters, the feasibility bound (13) evaluates
to Hfeas
min = ⌈1
∆t
p
2rminα/Umax⌉= 3. Thus, Hmin = 4
meets Assumption III.6 with a margin of one step. The
conflict detector uses the history length L = 50, the decay
constant cd = 0.3, and the speed lower bound ν = 0.5.
The funnel lower bound is the neighbor’s adaptive radius
evaluated at the fitted speed. Each scenario and strategy
is run over 20 random seeds with a per-run budget of
500 s, giving 360 runs in total. Within a seed, the initial
geometry is identical across strategies. We report a cost
sweep that records per-step solver time, prediction time,
and total computation, and separation traces that record
the minimum pairwise distance over time. All timings are
wall-clock under fixed parallel execution, so the evidence
lies in the ratios within a scenario, not in absolute seconds.
B. Computational Cost
Figure 4 decomposes the per-step cost across the six
scenarios, as means over the 20 seeds: solving at the short
horizon (Hmin), solving at the long horizon (Hmax), solving


12
−10
0
10
x [m]
−10
0
10
y [m]
−10
0
10
z [m]
N2, 20
3
 — 182 steps
1
2
−2
0
2
x [m]
−2
0
2
y [m]
−2
0
2
N2, 5
3
 — 205 steps
1
2
−10
0
10
x [m]
−10
0
10
y [m]
−10
0
10
z [m]
N4, 20
3
 — 221 steps
1
2
3
4
−2
0
2
x [m]
−2
0
2
y [m]
−2
0
2
N4, 5
3
 — 157 steps
1
2
3
4
−10
0
10
x [m]
−10
0
10
y [m]
−10
0
10
z [m]
N8, 20
3
 — 231 steps
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
−2
0
2
x [m]
−2
0
2
y [m]
−2
0
2
N8, 5
3
 — 189 steps
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
trajectories (seed 0, varia le [4,
10])
start
goal
ﬂoor projection
Fig. 3.
Closed-loop trajectories under the variable horizon for the
six benchmark scenarios, in open (203 m3, top) and tight (53 m3,
bottom) airspace. Circles mark the start positions, stars the goals,
and the gray curves on the floor are the horizontal projections. One
representative seed is shown per scenario, since overlaying all 20
would obscure the individual paths.
under the variable horizon, and the linear prediction of
Section III-B. The prediction costs 0.04 to 0.7 ms per step,
two to four orders of magnitude below the solver time at
any horizon and under 0.3% of the variable horizon’s own
per-step solver time. The long-horizon solver time rises
steeply with conflict intensity, from about 0.1 s per step
in the two-drone scenarios to 10.7 s in the eight-drone
open scenario, where it exhausts the 500 s budget within
the first fifty steps.
The variable horizon spends almost all steps at its lower
bound: its mean selected horizon lies between 4.1 and 4.5
across the scenarios, over the band [4, 10]. Its per-step
solver cost tracks the short-horizon curve and lies 4.5× to
N2
20
3
N4
20
3
N8
20
3
10
−1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
cost per step [ms]
0.04
0.15
0.62
N2
5
3
N4
5
3
N8
5
3
0.04
0.16
0.69
long-horizon solve (H
ma 
=
10)
short-horizon solve (H
min
=
4)
variable solve ([4,
10])
prediction
Fig. 4. Per-step solver and prediction cost across the six scenarios,
log scale, as means over 20 seeds per scenario and strategy.
8.6× below the long horizon’s in every scenario, where the
eight-drone open value is a lower bound because the long
horizon never passes the crossing. Since the horizon ratio
is only 2.5, these per-step ratios confirm the superlinear
growth of the solver cost in the horizon length.
Figure 5 reports the total computation. The variable
horizon undercuts the long fixed horizon by 2.0× to 2.7×
in every scenario in which the latter finishes. In the eight-
drone open scenario the long horizon exceeds the budget
in all 20 seeds, while the variable horizon completes every
seed in 290 s on average. In the open scenarios it even
undercuts the short fixed horizon, 38 versus 98 s at four
drones, because raising the horizon at the crossing resolves
the conflict earlier. The variable horizon completes the
mission in fewer steps than the short one, 220 versus 248,
and spends fewer of them in expensive active constraints,
which lowers the mean per-step solver time to 172 versus
393 ms. The long fixed horizon needs only 129 steps, but
at far higher per-step cost. In the tight scenarios, where
the confined space keeps conflicts active throughout, the
variable horizon costs up to 2.7× more than the short
fixed horizon, the price of its longer planning windows in
this case.
C. Separation and Safety
The variable horizon never violates the separation
constraint: over all 120 of its runs, the minimum pair-
wise distance stays at or above the contact boundary
2rmin = 0.8 m. The long fixed horizon likewise maintains
the boundary wherever it completes. The short fixed
horizon does not: in the eight-drone open scenario, 2 of 20
runs breach the boundary, dipping to 0.776 m at worst.
In the tight scenarios all strategies ride the boundary
through the crossing, with grazing contact at exactly
0.80 m. Table II lists the worst-case closest approach per
scenario over the 20 seeds. The dagger marks the boundary
breach, and the asterisk marks the long horizon’s eight-
drone open value, which covers only the pre-crossing phase
because of the timeout.
Figure 6 traces the minimum pairwise distance in the
two four-drone scenarios, as seed means with min–max
envelopes. In the open scenario the pattern is monotone
in the horizon. The short fixed horizon reacts late: it


13
N2
20
3
N4
20
3
N8
20
3
N2
5
3
N4
5
3
N8
5
3
10
1
10
2
10
3
total compute time [s]
2.5x
2.7x
1.8x*
2.4x
2.0x
2.0x
short fixed (H
min
 
4)
variable [4,
10]
long fixed (H
max
 
10)
not ﬁnished
Fig. 5. Total computation per scenario for the three strategies, log
scale, as means over 20 seeds. Labels give the total-time ratio of the
long fixed horizon to the variable horizon. The asterisk marks the
eight-drone open scenario, where the long fixed horizon exceeds the
500 s budget in every seed.
TABLE II
Worst-case closest approach [m] over 20 seeds per scenario.
Scenario
short fixed
variable
long fixed
N=2, 203
0.84
1.12
1.34
N=4, 203
0.81
0.86
1.07
N=8, 203
0.78†
0.81
0.83∗
N=2, 53
0.80
0.80
0.80
N=4, 53
0.80
0.80
0.81
N=8, 53
0.80
0.80
0.81
stays near the boundary for the longest time, 32 steps
below 1.2 m on the mean trace, with a worst-case closest
approach of 0.81 m. The long fixed horizon anticipates
early and stays farthest away, 1.07 m at worst and no step
below 1.2 m. The variable horizon dips almost as low as
the short horizon at the densest instant, 0.86 m at worst,
but only briefly, 3 steps below 1.2 m on the mean trace.
In the tight scenario the confined space forces all three
strategies onto the boundary, and they differ only in cost
(Section VI-B).
This behavior shows where the assumptions of Sec-
tion IV become tight. The guarantees are conditional
on per-step solver feasibility (Assumption IV.5), and the
short fixed horizon, although it meets the feasibility bound
Hfeas
min = 3 with one step to spare, operates at exactly that
margin: at eight drones its late reaction leaves conflicts the
solver can no longer resolve within four steps, producing
the isolated breaches. The variable horizon shares that
lower bound yet avoids every breach, because lifting the
horizon at a predicted crossing keeps the solver away
from the margin. Prediction quality thus governs eﬀiciency
within the certified band (Corollary IV.9), and in practice
it also eases the burden on the feasibility assumption on
which safety rests.
0
50
100
150
200
step
0
5
10
15
20
min. pairwise distance [m]
contact boundary (2r
min
)
short fixed (H
min
=
4)
variab e [4,
10]
 ong fixed (H
max
=
10)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
step
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
min. pairwise distance [m]
contact boundary (2r
min
)
short fixed (H
min
=
 )
variable [ ,
10]
long fixed (H
max
=
10)
Fig. 6. Minimum pairwise distance in the four-drone open scenario
(top) and tight scenario (bottom): seed mean per strategy with min–
max envelope over 20 seeds. The contact boundary is 2rmin = 0.8 m.
D. Operating Regime
The outcome of the comparison depends on the baseline
and on the operating regime. Against the long fixed
horizon, the variable horizon dominates everywhere: it is
2.0× to 2.7× faster in total wherever the long horizon
finishes, completes the eight-drone open swap that the
long horizon cannot, and concedes separation margin only
where margin is abundant. Against the short fixed horizon,
the picture splits by airspace. In the open scenarios, the
common case in the large-volume operations that motivate
the scheme, the variable horizon is both faster and safer: it
undercuts the short horizon’s total time and maintains the
boundary that the short horizon breaches at eight drones.
In the tight scenarios every strategy sits on the boundary
and the short horizon is cheaper, so the variable horizon’s
premium buys anticipation that the confined geometry
cannot convert into margin. It is thus the only strategy
that is tractable and boundary-respecting across the whole
benchmark matrix.
VII. Discussion and Conclusion
We present a conflict-predictive variable horizon for
distributed MPC. Each drone sizes its planning window to
cover its farthest predicted conflict, within a fixed band.
The horizon is the only quantity exposed to an otherwise
unchanged controller, so the cost of a long horizon is paid
only when a conflict is anticipated. We prove that recursive
feasibility and asymptotic stability are preserved for every
horizon in that band under a single computable condition


14
on its lower bound (Assumption III.6, Theorem IV.7),
and that the same perturbation argument carries the
guarantees to the linearized quadrotor and, as practical
stability, to the full nonlinear one (Corollary V.4). On
dense antipodal-swap benchmarks the variable horizon
undercuts a long fixed horizon in both per-step and
total computation, completes swaps that the long horizon
cannot finish within the time budget, and holds separation
where a short fixed horizon of comparable per-step cost
loses it. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
variable-horizon DMPC whose feasibility and stability
guarantees are independent of the prediction that drives
the horizon.
The horizon thereby turns from a fixed budget into a
resource allocated on demand. The capacity analysis we
build on treats it as exactly that budget, in the sense that a
horizon H resolves up to κ(H) sequential conflicts [5]. The
variable horizon spends it where conflicts are predicted
and conserves it elsewhere, without weakening the density
limits, which are purely geometric. Unlike learned and
chance-constrained schemes, in which the forecast enters
the avoidance constraint and prediction accuracy is there-
fore safety-critical, our construction keeps the predictor
out of the safety argument altogether. A better predictor
improves only eﬀiciency, and a worse one cannot invalidate
the certified band (Corollary IV.9). Beyond quadrotors,
the construction covers any vehicle whose translational
dynamics reduce to a double integrator perturbed by a
bounded residual under a stabilizing inner loop, since the
combined perturbation ¯e need only meet the dissipation
condition of Lemma IV.3.
The scheme has limitations, and each points to a
concrete extension. The linear predictor loses accuracy
against strongly maneuvering neighbors, which the funnel
mitigates but does not remove. A learned predictor at
the same funnel interface would sharpen anticipation
without touching the guarantees. At the densest crossing
the horizon collapses to its lower bound and the drones
pass closer to the contact boundary than under a long
fixed horizon, although they never breach it and spend
far less time near it than under a short one. A maneuver-
reserve bound that lifts the horizon while a conflict is
detected would keep them farther from the boundary
without raising Hmin. The nonlinear extension assumes
an inner loop of suﬀicient bandwidth and an attitude
error small enough for the linearization of R(Θ) to stay
valid, which excludes aggressive aerobatic flight. Large
excursions would require a geometric controller on SO(3)
with almost-global stability [32]. Finally, the evaluation is
in simulation, and its wall-clock timings are informative
as ratios within a scenario rather than as absolute figures,
so hardware experiments remain to be done.
The key question we leave open is stated in Re-
mark IV.8. The variable horizon appears to weaken the
coupling between neighboring subproblems, because it
resolves conflicts earlier and with less constraint activa-
tion. A proof of that link would turn the contraction
condition from something the variable horizon preserves
into something it improves.
Funding
The research project was funded by “The Ministry of
the Environment, Nature Conservation and Transport of
the State of North Rhine-Westphalia” in Germany and co-
financed by the European Union for the research project
“SIDDA - Sustainable Intermodal Drone Delivery Airline”
with grant number IN-ML-1-013b.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. They
have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the
work reported in this manuscript. The funding source
had no role in the design of the study, in the collection,
analysis, or interpretation of data, in the writing of the
manuscript, or in the decision to submit it for publication.
References
[1] SESAR 3 Joint Undertaking, “U-space concept of operations
(ConOps),” Publications Oﬀice of the European Union, Tech-
nical Report Edition 4, 2023.
[2] P. Kopardekar, J. Rios, T. Prevot, M. Johnson, J. Jung, and
J. E. Robinson III, “UAS traﬀic management (UTM) concept
of operations to safely enable low altitude flight operations,” in
16th AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations
Conference, 2016.
[3] C. E. Luis, M. Vukosavljev, and A. P. Schoellig, “Online tra-
jectory generation with distributed model predictive control for
multi-robot motion planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 604–611, 2020.
[4] G. Stomberg, A. Engelmann, and T. Faulwasser, “A com-
pendium of optimization algorithms for distributed linear-
quadratic MPC,” at - Automatisierungstechnik, vol. 70, no. 4,
pp. 317–330, 2022.
[5] L. Mümken, D. Altinses, S. Lier, and A. Schwung, “Geometric
and control-theoretic limits on drone density in bounded
airspace,” Drones, vol. 10, no. 2, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/2504-446X/10/2/139
[6] L. Mümken, D. Altinses, M. Schwung, S. Lier, and A. Schwung,
“Distributed model predictive control with adaptive safety
zones
for
multi-fleet
drone
operations,”
2026.
[Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.20651
[7] H. Michalska and D. Q. Mayne, “Robust receding horizon
control of constrained nonlinear systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 1623–1633, 1993.
[8] A. Richards and J. P. How, “Robust variable horizon model pre-
dictive control for vehicle maneuvering,” International Journal
of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 333–351,
2006.
[9] A. J. Krener, “Adaptive horizon model predictive control,”
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 13, pp. 31–36, 2018.
[10] Z. Sun, L. Dai, K. Liu, D. V. Dimarogonas, and Y. Xia, “Robust
self-triggered MPC with adaptive prediction horizon for per-
turbed nonlinear systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 4780–4787, 2019.
[11] R.
Rostami
and
D.
Görges,
“An
admm-based
algorithm
for stabilizing distributed model predictive control without
terminal cost and constraint,” European Journal of Control,
vol. 73, p. 100881, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0947358023001097
[12] E. Bøhn, S. Gros, S. Moe, and T. A. Johansen, “Reinforcement
learning of the prediction horizon in model predictive control,”
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 314–320, 2021.
[13] S. Gupta, A. Kumar, N. S. Tripathy, and S. V. Shah, “RL-
based variable horizon model predictive control of multi-robot
systems using versatile on-demand collision avoidance,” in arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.07071, 2023.


15
[14] A. Gräfe, J. Eickhoff, and S. Trimpe, “Event-triggered and
distributed model predictive control for guaranteed collision
avoidance in uav swarms,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 55, no. 13,
pp. 79–84, 2022, 9th IFAC Conference on Networked Systems
NECSYS 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2405896322006292
[15] A. Ma, K. Liu, Q. Zhang, T. Liu, and Y. Xia, “Event-
triggered distributed MPC with variable prediction horizon,”
IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 66, no. 10, pp.
4873–4880, 2021.
[16] M. Schwung and J. Lunze, “Networked event-based collision
avoidance of mobile objects with trajectory planning based on
Bézier curves,” European Journal of Control, vol. 58, 2020.
[17] P. Fiorini and Z. Shiller, “Motion planning in dynamic environ-
ments using velocity obstacles,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 760–772, 1998.
[18] J. van den Berg, S. J. Guy, M. Lin, and D. Manocha, “Reciprocal
n-body collision avoidance,” in Robotics Research.
Springer,
2011, pp. 3–19.
[19] E. Olcay, H. Meeß, and G. Elger, “Dynamic obstacle avoidance
for UAVs using MPC and GP-based motion forecast,” in 2024
European Control Conference (ECC), 2024, pp. 1024–1031.
[20] S. Yoshikawa, S. Watanabe, and T. Okamoto, “Dynamic ob-
stacle avoidance for multi-rotor UAV using chance-constraints
based on obstacle velocity,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
vol. 161, p. 104329, 2023.
[21] Y. Kuwata, A. Richards, T. Schouwenaars, and J. P. How,
“Distributed robust receding horizon control for multivehicle
guidance,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 627–641, 2007.
[22] O. Shorinwa, T. Halsted, J. Yu, and M. Schwager, “Distributed
model predictive control via separable optimization in multi-
agent networks,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 6,
pp. 4231–4248, 2023.
[23] D. P. Bertsekas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Parallel and Distributed
Computation: Numerical Methods.
Prentice-Hall, 1989.
[24] M. Köhler, M. A. Müller, and F. Allgöwer, “Distributed MPC
for self-organized cooperation of multi-agent systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3821–
3836, 2024.
[25] A. D. Ames, X. Xu, J. W. Grizzle, and P. Tabuada, “Control
barrier function based quadratic programs for safety critical
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 62,
no. 8, pp. 3861–3876, 2017.
[26] J. Zeng, Z. Li, and K. Sreenath, “Enhancing feasibility and
safety of nonlinear model predictive control with discrete-time
control barrier functions,” in 2021 60th IEEE Conference on
Decision and Control (CDC), 2021, pp. 6137–6144.
[27] S. Zhang, O. So, K. Garg, and C. Fan, “GCBF+: A neural
graph control barrier function framework for distributed safe
multiagent control,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41,
pp. 1533–1552, 2025.
[28] R. Mahony, V. Kumar, and P. Corke, “Multirotor aerial vehicles:
Modeling, estimation, and control of quadrotor,” IEEE Robotics
& Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 20–32, 2012.
[29] H. K. Khalil, Nonlinear systems.
Upper Saddle River, N.J.:
Prentice Hall, 2002.
[30] M. Schwung, D. Vey, and J. Lunze, “Quadrotor tracking control:
Design and experiments,” in 2019 IEEE Conference on Control
Technology and Applications (CCTA), 2019, pp. 768–775.
[31] T. Baca, D. Hert, G. Loianno, M. Saska, and V. Kumar,
“Model predictive trajectory tracking and collision avoidance
for reliable outdoor deployment of unmanned aerial vehicles,” in
2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2018, pp. 6753–6760.
[32] T. Lee, M. Leok, and N. H. McClamroch, “Geometric tracking
control of a quadrotor UAV on SE(3),” in 49th IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control (CDC), 2010, pp. 5420–5425.
[33] D. Mellinger and V. Kumar, “Minimum snap trajectory gener-
ation and control for quadrotors,” in 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011, pp.
2520–2525.
[34] S. Lupashin, M. Hehn, M. W. Mueller, A. P. Schoellig,
M. Sherback, and R. D’Andrea, “A platform for aerial robotics
research and demonstration: The flying machine arena,” Mecha-
tronics, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 41–54, 2014.
[35] E. Tal and S. Karaman, “Accurate tracking of aggressive
quadrotor trajectories using incremental nonlinear dynamic in-
version and differential flatness,” IEEE Transactions on Control
Systems Technology, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 1203–1218, 2021.
[36] M. Faessler, A. Franchi, and D. Scaramuzza, “Differential
flatness of quadrotor dynamics subject to rotor drag for ac-
curate tracking of high-speed trajectories,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 620–626, 2018.
[37] D. Mayne, J. Rawlings, C. Rao, and P. Scokaert, “Constrained
model predictive control: Stability and optimality,” Automatica,
vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 789–814, 2000. [Online]. Available: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005109899002149
