Global Path Planner with Multi-Model
Switching
Pietro Gori ∗Francesco Iotti ∗Eduard Zelenay ∗∗∗
Rastislav Marko ∗∗Michele Pierallini ∗Franco Angelini ∗
Gabriele Pannocchia ∗∗∗∗Manolo Garabini ∗
∗Centro di Ricerca “Enrico Piaggio” and the Dipartimento di
Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Universit`a di Pisa, Largo Lucio
Lazzarino 1, 56126 Pisa, Italy
∗∗Panza Robotics, National Center of Robotics, Ilkovicova 3, 841 04
Bratislava, Slovakia
∗∗∗Institute of Robotics and Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical
Engineering and Information Technology, Slovak University of
Technology in Bratislava, Ilkovicova 3, 812 19 Bratislava, Slovakia
∗∗∗∗Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile e Industriale, Universit`a di
Pisa, Largo Lucio Lazzarino 1, 56126 Pisa, Italy
Abstract: This work enhances global path planning via a pure-pursuit controller with
multi-model kinematic switching that sustains plan fidelity across diverse terrains. The system
includes a traversability graph for terrain analysis, a Heading-Aware A* algorithm generating
feasible paths, and a multi-model Pure Pursuit controller for dynamic tracking. A core innovation
is adaptive kinematic modeling, enabling real-time switching between kinematic models based
on terrain features and robot states. This adaptability optimizes path efficiency and energy use
in challenging scenarios. We validate the approach in simulation on different platforms, namely,
Artaban quadruped and X3 quadrotor drone, showcasing improved performance, robustness,
and adaptability over standard baselines.
Keywords: Autonomous navigation, Task and motion planning, Humanoid and legged robots
1. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, mobile robots possess remarkable capabilities
to traverse diverse terrains and navigate complex envi-
ronments [Hoeller et al., 2024]. However, despite their
impressive mobility, these robots typically rely on human
operators to determine their actions and behaviors [Iotti
et al., 2025]. This dependence on external control intro-
duces rigid constraints, significantly limiting the robot’s
ability to function effectively in scenarios where human
intervention is impractical or potentially hazardous [Chen
et al., 2025].
Enhancing robot autonomy offers several tangible ben-
efits. Autonomous platforms can continue operations
in hazardous or communication-restricted environments,
such as disaster zones, where teleoperation is challenging
[Loganathan and Ahmad, 2023]. Furthermore, onboard
decision-making enables robots to dynamically adjust their
⋆This research was funded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe
under grant no. 101079342 (Fostering Opportunities Towards Slovak
Excellence in Advanced Control for Smart Industries), and funded
by the Italian Ministry of Education and Research in the framework
of the FISA 2023 OCCAM Project and the “FoReLab” (Future-
oriented Research Lab) Project (Departments of Excellence). Pietro
Gori and Francesco Iotti equally contributed. © 2026 the authors.
This work has been accepted to IFAC for publication under a
Creative Commons Licence CC-BY-NC-ND.
behaviors in real-time, greatly improving operational effi-
ciency [Wu et al., 2023].
Path planning algorithms enhance robotic autonomy by
enabling efficient navigation in complex, dynamic envi-
ronments, improving reliability, safety, and energy effi-
ciency through collision avoidance and path optimization.
Their effectiveness hinges on balancing computational ef-
ficiency with real-time adaptability. Recent advances in-
clude application-specific approaches: Hirayama et al. [Hi-
rayama et al., 2019] developed topological modeling for
autonomous bulldozers in mining areas, integrating ma-
terial handling and dynamics; Xing et al. [Xing et al.,
2022] combined Seeker Optimization (SOA) for global
paths with Actor-Critic reinforcement learning for local
adaptability.
Path planning for quadruped robots operating in complex
and unstructured environments requires robust methods
that effectively combine global and local navigation strate-
gies. In [Jian et al., 2021], the Coupling Two-Stage Path
Planning (CTSP) approach integrates iterative global op-
timization with refined local cost functions, facilitating
smooth transitions between global routes and local maneu-
vers. Similarly, sampling-based global planners combined
with dynamics-aware local strategies explicitly incorporate
robot kinematics and dynamics, enhancing traversal of
challenging terrains [Norby and Johnson, 2020].
arXiv:2609.13015v1  [cs.RO]  11 Sep 2026


Recent advancements focus on integrating perception and
terrain analysis to improve real-time navigation. GPU-
accelerated elevation mapping significantly reduces com-
putational overhead by efficiently representing terrain ge-
ometry [Miki et al., 2022]. In [Dixit et al., 2025], the STEP
framework transforms noisy LiDAR data into risk-aware
planning through Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) met-
rics. TRG-Planner employs a direction-aware risk graph
encoding terrain stability and reachability, enabling hier-
archical real-time decision-making [Lee et al., 2025]. Ad-
ditionally, machine learning techniques for traversability
assessment and foothold scoring have proven effective in
dynamic, uncertain environments [Wellhausen and Hut-
ter, 2023]. The TAO framework incorporates both appar-
ent and relative traversability metrics, further enhancing
adaptive planning and motion control for effective hazard
avoidance in mountainous terrains [Yoo et al., 2024].
Improving robot autonomy requires enabling robots to
reason about and select the most suitable motion model for
a given task. Existing approaches typically assume a single,
fixed kinematic model, which limits robustness in diverse
environments [Dasanayake et al., 2025]. In this work, we
introduce a global path planning framework with multi-
model switching, allowing the robot to autonomously
switch between models based on hardware constraints,
task requirements, and environmental conditions. The
main contributions are:
• A novel Heading-Aware A* algorithm that incorpo-
rates orientation costs into path planning, enabling
smoother and more efficient trajectories.
• An adaptive trajectory follower capable of switching
between kinematic models according to the robot’s
internal state and environment.
• A comprehensive validation on different robots in
both simulation and real-world experiments, showcas-
ing robust and versatile performance.
2. PATH PLANNING ALGORITHM
In this section, we introduce the path planning algorithm
used to navigate the robot through the environment. The
algorithm is designed to find an optimal path from a start
point to a goal point while avoiding obstacles, ensuring
efficiency and safety in its motion. The process begins
with a raw point cloud of the environment as input,
which is processed to compute traversability information.
This information is then used to build the traversability
graph, as described in Section 2.1. The Heading-Aware A*
Algorithm, detailed in Section 2.2, is employed to find the
optimal path from the start point to the goal point.
Finally, the Pure Pursuit controller, discussed in Section
2.3, refines the path, generating a smooth trajectory for
the robot to navigate through the environment. Figure 1
illustrates the overall pipeline of the path planning process.
2.1 Traversability Map
Initially, we obtain raw point cloud data of robot positions
from sensor measurements. From these data, we iden-
tify collision-free areas based on terrain features such as
height filtering, ground segmentation using RANSAC, and
surface normal estimation. Points are classified according
to surface normals: vertical normals indicate navigable
regions, horizontal normals represent obstacles, and in-
termediate cases are assessed using grid-based slope and
height evaluations. Navigable regions are further refined
through coarser grid processing and validated with 2.5D
maps. Finally, obstacles are grouped via spatial clustering
(DBSCAN [Deng, 2020]), and nearby navigable points are
reclassified to mitigate noise and potential misclassifica-
tion. We define C ∈R3 as the configuration space of the
robot, representing all possible positions in the environ-
ment. After this process, we identify two subsets:
• Cfree ⊆C: the set of all traversable positions, corre-
sponding to the navigable regions;
• Cobs ⊆C: the set of all non-traversable positions,
corresponding to the obstacle regions.
Given the sets Cfree and Cobs, we build the traversability
graph TG = (V, E), which serves as the discrete represen-
tation of the environment for path planning. Each vertex
vi = (pi, c(vi), Ei) ∈V encodes a feasible robot position,
where pi ∈Cfree denotes the spatial position, c(vi) is
the traversability cost, and Ei ⊆E is the set of incident
edges of vertex i. Edges ξj
i ∈Ei connect pairs of vertices
if a direct, collision-free transition between vi and vj is
possible, determined by spatial proximity and obstacle
clearance. This graph structure enables efficient search for
optimal paths, leveraging both geometric connectivity and
traversability information.
The cost function c : V →R for each vertex vi ∈V is
computed as follows:
c(vi) = wcollccoll(vi) + wdistcdist(vi) + wslopecslope(vi), (1)
where ccoll, cdist, cslope
:
V
→
R are the collision,
distance, and slope cost functions, respectively, and
wcoll, wdist, wslope are the corresponding weights. Figure
2 illustrates the cost evolution in the traversability map.
Collision Cost
The collision cost ccoll(vi) penalizes a ver-
tex vi ∈Cfree by its proximity to Cobs. Around pi we con-
sider a disk of radius rrobot =
p
(Lrobot/2)2 + (Wrobot/2)2,
the robot’s XY circumscribed radius, where Lrobot and
Wrobot are the robot’s length and width, respectively. If
any obstacle point lies inside this disk, we mark a hard
collision; otherwise we apply a soft penalty P(dist) = A ·
exp

−
  dist
σ
2
, where dist is the minimum Euclidean
distance to Cobs, A is the maximum penalty, and σ controls
the decay rate.. This encourages clearance while remaining
permissive in narrow passages.
Distance Cost
The distance cost function cdist(vi) is
defined as the Euclidean distance from the vertex position
pi to the next vertex position pj in the traversability
graph. This cost is computed as:
cdist(vi) = ∥pj −pi∥2,
(2)
where ∥· ∥2 denotes the Euclidean norm.
Slope Cost
The slope cost function cslope(vi) measures
how steep the terrain is around a vertex vi, since steeper
slopes are more difficult to traverse. To compute it, neigh-
boring points are first translated so that vi lies at the
origin (0, 0, 0). A plane of the form z = ax + by + c is
then fitted to these points using least squares. Because
the plane passes through the origin, c ≈0. The plane’s
normal vector is n = [−a, −b, 1], and the local slope angle
is the angle between n and the vertical axis ˆk = [0, 0, 1]:


Traversability
Map
(Sec.2.1)
Heading-Aware
A* Algorithm
(Sec.2.2)
Pure Pursuit
Controller
(Sec.2.3)
Raw Input
Point Cloud
Traversability
Graph
Optimal Path
Final
Interpolated
Trajectory
Fig. 1. Path planning pipeline using traversability computations, A* search, and Pure Pursuit control.
θ = arccos
 
n · ˆk
∥n∥∥ˆk∥
!
= arccos

1
√
a2 + b2 + 1

.
(3)
Finally, cslope(vi) is defined as a function of θ, with larger
angles corresponding to higher traversal cost.
2.2 Heading-Aware A* Algorithm
We compute optimal paths from a start vertex, i.e.,
vstart
= (pstart, c(vstart), Estart), to a goal vertex, i.e.,
vgoal = (pgoal, c(vgoal), Egoal), on a traversability graph
TG = (V, E) using a heading-aware A* variant. Each search
state combines vertex vi ∈V and arrival heading ψi
as (vi, ψi), enabling orientation-dependent cost penalties
(e.g., for sharp turns and terrain slope) that generate
smooth and feasible trajectories also for non-holonomic
robots. The complete procedure is detailed in Algorithm 1.
The core of the algorithm resamble the core of the classic
A* algorithm, maintaining a min-priority queue of candi-
date states ordered by their estimated total cost (f-score),
a cumulative path cost map (g-score) for each visited state,
and a predecessor tracking map for path reconstruction.
The cumulative cost, g(vi, ψi), to reach a state (vi, ψi) is
determined by summing the costs of individual transitions.
For each transition from a current state (vj, ψj) to a
successor state (vi, ψi), the step cost, Cstep, consists of
three primary components:
• Node Cost (Cbase): An inherent cost associated
with traversing the edge ξi
j, representing the baseline
effort required for movement. Specifically, this cost is
defined by the node cost c(vi), i.e., (1), of the suc-
cessor vertex vi, which incorporates the information
from the traversability graph.
• Orientation Change Penalty (Chead): A penalty
for deviations in the robot’s heading. The orientation
of the traversed edge, ψedge, is computed from the
displacement vector between pj and pi. The abso-
lute difference between this edge orientation and the
Fig. 2. Example traversability map derived from raw point
cloud data. Navigable regions (Cfree) and obstacle
regions (Cobs) are visualized, with color intensity in-
dicating the local traversability cost: higher intensity
corresponds to higher traversal difficulty or risk.
Algorithm 1 Heading-Aware A* Algorithm
Require: Traversability graph TG = (V, E), start vs, goal
vg, headings ψs, ψg
Ensure: Optimal path from vs to vg with heading con-
straints
1: Initialize queue with (vs, ψs); g[·] ←∞; g[(vs, ψs)] ←0
2: f[(vs, ψs)] ←h(vs, ψs); parent[·] ←Null
3: while queue not empty do
4:
Pop (vc, ψc) with min f
5:
if vc = vg then return path via parent
6:
end if
7:
for each neighbor vn of vc do
8:
d ←pn −pc; ψedge ←atan2(dy, dx)
9:
∆ψ ←AngleDiff(ψedge, ψc)
10:
Cstep ←c(vn) + wψ|∆ψ| + wslope · sin θ · cos ϕ
11:
gnew ←g[(vc, ψc)] + Cstep
12:
if gnew < g[(vn, ψedge)] then
13:
g[(vn, ψedge)] ←gnew
14:
f ←gnew + ∥pn −pg∥2 + wgoal · |ψg −ψedge|
15:
parent[(vn, ψedge)] ←(vc, ψc)
16:
Enqueue (vn, ψedge)
17:
end if
18:
end for
19: end while
robot’s current orientation, ∆ψ = ψedge −ψj, is
normalized to (−π, π] and weighted by a coefficient
wψ:
Chead = wψ · |∆ψ|.
(4)
• Terrain Interaction Cost (Cslope): A terrain-
adaptive cost that penalizes movements based on the
local slope and the travelling direction relative to the
surface normal. This cost is calculated as:
Cslope = wslope · sin(θ) · cos(ϕ),
(5)
where wslope is a weighting factor, θ is the slope angle
at vj (3), and ϕ is the angle between the normalized
movement vector (from pj to pi) and the surface
normal at vj, i.e., n. This formulation increases the
cost for traversing steeper terrain, especially when
moving uphill against the normal. However, it allows
the robot to traverse steep slopes if necessary.
The total step cost for a transition is the sum of these
components:
Cstep = Cbase + Chead + Cslope.
(6)
The cumulative g-score for a successor state is updated if
a newly discovered path yields a lower total cost.
The heuristic function, h(vi, ψi), provides an admissible
estimate of the cost-to-go from a successor state (vi, ψi)
to the goal by leveraging the Euclidean distance between
the spatial coordinates of vi and the target node vgoal.
Additionally, if a specific goal orientation ψgoal is provided,
a weighted penalty for the angular deviation between the


successor’s orientation ψs and ψgoal is incorporated into
the heuristic:
h(vi, ψi) = ||pi −pgoal||2 + wgoal
ψ
· |ψi −ψgoal|,
(7)
where wgoal
ψ
is a weight factor that balances the importance
of spatial distance against the orientation penalty. The f-
score is then computed as the sum of the cumulative cost
and the heuristic.
The heading-aware A* algorithm proceeds by repeatedly
selecting the state with the lowest total estimated cost (f-
score) from the priority queue. Once the goal is reached,
the optimal path is reconstructed by tracing back through
the predecessor map from the goal to the start.
2.3 Multi-Model Pure Pursuit Controller
The pure pursuit controller is a geometric path tracking
method widely used for mobile robots [Lee et al., 2025,
Samuel et al., 2016]. In our framework, it tracks the path
generated by the Heading-Aware A* planner (Sec. 2.2)
and computes velocity commands for both planar and non-
planar motion.
At each control cycle, the controller selects a lookahead
point at distance Ld along the reference path and com-
putes the tracking error in the robot frame. According
to the path geometry and robot state, the controller dy-
namically switches between unicycle and omnidirectional
kinematic models.
In the following, we briefly describe the two kinematic
models used in our pure pursuit controller.
For planar motion, the unicycle model is:
˙x = uuni cos ψ,
(8)
˙y = uuni sin ψ,
(9)
˙ψ = ω.
(10)
For non-planar motion, the omnidirectional model is:
˙x = uomni
x
,
(11)
˙y = uomni
y
,
(12)
˙z = uomni
z
.
(13)
The model selection process is designed to ensure that the
robot always follows the most efficient control strategy,
adapting to both the geometry of the path and the robot’s
current state.
The tracking error in the robot frame is defined as
eR = R⊤
RW
"xl −xr
yl −yr
zl −zr
#
.
(14)
From eR, the planar distance d, heading error ∆ψ, and
vertical displacement zdisp are computed as
d =
q
e2x + e2y,
(15)
∆ψ = atan2(ey, ex),
(16)
zdisp = ez.
(17)
The controller selects the unicycle model when
|∆ψ| < δψ
and
|zdisp| < δz,
(18)
otherwise, the omnidirectional model is used. Note that δψ
and δz are predefined thresholds.
Fig. 3. Top-down view of the planned trajectory in the XY
plane.
After selecting the appropriate kinematic model, the con-
troller computes the velocities required to reach the looka-
head point.
Omnidirectional Control
In omnidirectional mode, the
commanded velocity is proportional to the tracking error:
uomni =
0,
D < ϵ,
S eR,
otherwise,
(19)
where
S = min
uomni
max
D
, 1

,
D = ∥eR∥2.
(20)
Unicycle Control
In unicycle mode, the linear velocity
is proportional to the distance error:
uuni = kvd cos(∆ψ),
(21)
saturated to the admissible velocity range [−uuni
max, uuni
max].
The angular velocity is computed from the heading error:
ω = kω∆ψ,
(22)
where kv and kω are proportional gains for linear and an-
gular velocity, respectively. Fig. 3 illustrates the resulting
trajectory obtained with the proposed controller.
3. NUMERICAL RESULTS
The path planning method described in Sec. 2 is then
validated through both simulation and real-world experi-
ments. The goal is to showcase the effectiveness of the pro-
posed approach in generating feasible and efficient paths
for robots in various environments.
3.1 Simulation
The proposed path planner was validated using the Arta-
ban robot [ˇDurikoviˇc and Maˇcicov´a, 2024], developed by
Panza Robotics 1 , and an X3 quadrotor drone.
Artaban quadruped
is a legged robot for hazardous en-
vironments, featuring cardan joints and four-bar linkages
enabling multidirectional locomotion, with three actuators
per leg. Its driver architecture employs PD controllers and
inverse dynamics to handle unique kinematic loops in the
rear legs, ensuring precise torque control and stability.
The system compensates for friction and inertia, reduc-
ing sim-to-real discrepancies. The robot runs Quad-SDK
1 Company website: [https://panzarobotics.com


Fig. 4. Trajectory executed by the Artaban robot during the simulation experiment.
Fig. 5. Body position tracking vs. reference in x, y, and z
axes.
[Norby et al., 2022], an open-source ROS-based framework
integrating planning, control, and estimation. The global
planner node, implemented in C++, interfaces with Quad-
SDK, defining the robot’s position and velocity to follow
the trajectory.
The validation scenario requires the robot to navigate
through a narrow doorway before entering an open space
area. During the door traversal, the robot adopts a
unicycle-like motion, aligning its longitudinal axis with
the doorway to ensure successful passage. Once through
the door and into the open space, the robot transitions to
more flexible, omnidirectional movements, leveraging its
full kinematic capabilities to efficiently reach the goal. This
showcases the planner’s ability to adapt motion strategies
based on environmental constraints. Figures 5 and 6 re-
port the simulation results. The reference trajectories for
position and orientation closely match the ground truth
data, particularly in the horizontal plane (X and Y axes)
and yaw orientation. Minor deviations are observed in the
vertical axis (Z), where the algorithm generates a smooth,
idealized trajectory compared to the robot’s ground truth,
which exhibits realistic oscillations caused by physical dy-
namics and interactions with terrain, as depicted in Fig.
5. Similarly, the planned orientations maintain minimal
roll and pitch angles, reflecting simplified assumptions in
the planner, whereas the simulated robot naturally expe-
riences more pronounced body tilts, Fig. 6.
X3 quadrotor drone
is a type of unmanned aerial vehicle
(UAV) with four rotors arranged in a cross (X) configu-
ration. It is equipped with a ROS-based flight controller
capable of executing velocity commands. In the drone
simulation, our aim is to validate the planner’s capability
to generate smooth and efficient trajectories in a 3D space.
The drone navigates through a complex environment, re-
quiring precise control over its position and orientation to
avoid obstacles and reach the target location. Despite the
complexity of the environment, the planner successfully
computes trajectories that the drone can follow accurately.
Fig. 6. Body orientation tracking vs. reference
Fig. 7. Body position tracking vs. reference in x, y, and z
axes.
Similarly to the simulation with the quadruped robot, Fig.
7 shows a good tracking performance.
3.2 Real-World Experiment
To further evaluate the robustness of our approach, we
conducted experiments on the real Artaban hardware. The
results demonstrate that the robot successfully completed
the path, validating the effectiveness of the planner in a
real-world setting. For the real robot scenario, the ref-
erence trajectory, Fig. 3, computed by the planner also
closely tracks the actual robot movement. The positional
tracking, depicted in Fig.8, is consistent with the simula-
tion, with minor discrepancies attributed primarily to real-
world sensor noise and execution imperfections. Orienta-
tion tracking, inferred to be similar to simulation results,
further supports the algorithm’s capability in effectively
managing heading (yaw) and maintaining nominal body
orientations (roll and pitch), although the dynamic influ-
ences in a real-world environment slightly amplify discrep-
ancies observed in simulation, Fig.9.
4. CONCLUSION
This paper presented an integrated framework for robot
navigation in complex planar and non-planar environ-
ments. The proposed approach combines a Heading-Aware
A* planner operating on a traversability graph with a


Fig. 8. Body position tracking vs. reference
Fig. 9. Body orientation tracking vs. reference
multi-model pure pursuit controller for adaptive trajectory
tracking. The planner generates feasible and smooth paths
by incorporating orientation information into the graph
search process, while the controller dynamically switches
between unicycle and omnidirectional motion models ac-
cording to the local terrain and path geometry. The frame-
work was validated in simulation and real-world exper-
iments using the Artaban robot, demonstrating reliable
navigation through narrow passages, elevation changes,
and open environments. Future work will focus on dy-
namic obstacle avoidance and online replanning in more
challenging scenarios.
REFERENCES
Chen, W., Chi, W., Ji, S., Ye, H., Liu, J., Jia, Y., Yu, J.,
and Cheng, J. (2025). A survey of autonomous robots
and multi-robot navigation: Perception, planning and
collaboration.
Biomimetic Intelligence and Robotics,
5(2), 100203.
Dasanayake, P.S., Baranauskas, V., Dervinis, G., and
Balasevicius, L. (2025).
A review of mathematical
models in robotics. Applied Sciences, 15(14).
Deng, D. (2020). Dbscan clustering algorithm based on
density. In 2020 7th international forum on electrical
engineering and automation (IFEEA), 949–953. IEEE.
Dixit, A., Fan, D.D., Otsu, K., Dey, S., Agha-Mohammadi,
A.A., and Burdick, J.W. (2025).
Step: Stochastic
traversability evaluation and planning for risk-aware
navigation; results from the darpa subterranean chal-
lenge. IEEE Transactions on Field Robotics, 2, 81–99.
ˇDurikoviˇc, R. and Maˇcicov´a, Z. (2024). Artaban: Adaptive
control for multidirectional locomotion.
In 2024 New
Trends in Signal Processing (NTSP), 1–8. IEEE.
Hirayama, M., Guivant, J., Katupitiya, J., and Whitty,
M. (2019). Path planning for autonomous bulldozers.
Mechatronics, 58, 20–38.
Hoeller,
D.,
Rudin,
N.,
Sako,
D.,
and
Hutter,
M.
(2024). Anymal parkour: Learning agile navigation for
quadrupedal robots. Science Robotics, 9(88), eadi7566.
Iotti, F., Ranjan, A., Angelini, F., and Garabini, M.
(2025).
Omniquad: A wheeled-legged hybrid robot
with omnidirectional wheels. Mechanism and Machine
Theory, 214, 106125.
Jian, Z., Zhang, S., Chen, S., Nan, Z., and Zheng, N.
(2021). A global-local coupling two-stage path planning
method for mobile robots. IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters, 6(3), 5349–5356.
Lee, D., Nahrendra, I.M.A., Oh, M., Yu, B., and Myung,
H. (2025). Trg-planner: Traversal risk graph-based path
planning in unstructured environments for safe and
efficient navigation.
IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 10(2), 1736–1743.
Loganathan, A. and Ahmad, N.S. (2023). A systematic
review on recent advances in autonomous mobile robot
navigation.
Engineering Science and Technology, an
International Journal, 40, 101343.
Miki, T., Wellhausen, L., Grandia, R., Jenelten, F.,
Homberger, T., and Hutter, M. (2022). Elevation map-
ping for locomotion and navigation using gpu.
In
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2273–2280.
Norby, J. and Johnson, A.M. (2020). Fast global motion
planning for dynamic legged robots. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), 3829–3836.
Norby, J., Yang, Y., Tajbakhsh, A., Ren, J., Yim, J.K.,
Stutt, A., Yu, Q., Flowers, N., and Johnson, A.M.
(2022).
Quad-sdk: Full stack software framework for
agile quadrupedal locomotion. In ICRA Workshop on
Legged Robots, 1–5. sn.
Samuel, M., Hussein, M., and Mohamad, M.B. (2016). A
review of some pure-pursuit based path tracking tech-
niques for control of autonomous vehicle. International
Journal of Computer Applications, 135(1), 35–38.
Wellhausen, L. and Hutter, M. (2023). Artplanner: Robust
legged robot navigation in the field. Field Robotics, 3,
413–434.
Wu, M., Yeong, C.F., Su, E.L.M., Holderbaum, W., and
Yang, C. (2023).
A review on energy efficiency in
autonomous mobile robots.
Robotic Intelligence and
Automation, 43(6), 648–668.
Xing, X., Ding, H., Liang, Z., Li, B., and Yang, Z. (2022).
Robot path planner based on deep reinforcement learn-
ing and the seeker optimization algorithm. Mechatron-
ics, 88, 102918.
Yoo, S.W., Son, E.I., and Seo, S.W. (2024). Traversability-
aware adaptive optimization for path planning and
control in mountainous terrain.
IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 9(6), 5078–5085.
