Title: Mini-Batch Risk-Averse Deep Q-Learning: A Robot Navigation Case Study

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.07998v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 02:45:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Mini-Batch Risk-Averse Deep Q-Learning: A Robot Navigation Case Study 

## Aayush Patel and Andrzej Ruszczyński ∗

## September 7, 2026 

Abstract 

We study the control of Markov decision processes in which the quality of a policy is evaluated by a dynamic, time-consistent Markov risk measure rather than by an expected discounted cost. The main obstacle to combining such measures with reinforcement learning is that a transition risk mapping depends on the transition kernel in a nonlinear way, and therefore cannot be estimated from a single observed transition. We remove this obstacle by employing mini-batch transition risk mappings: the mapping is applied to the empirical measure of 𝑁 independent next-state samples, and the result is averaged. The resulting mapping is again coherent. However, as an expected value of a function of 𝑁 

next-state values, it admits an unbiased one-sample estimator. We embed this mapping into a double deep Q-network, analyze the two sources of estimation bias that arise, and obtain a risk-averse Q-learning method applicable to state spaces far beyond the reach of tabular schemes. The method is applied to an underwater robot navigation problem, in which a vehicle must visit collection points, gather stochastic information payloads, and deliver them at transmission points, while exposed at each step to the risk of destruction. A hierarchical decomposition delegates path execution to an exact graph search and confines learning to the high-level “collect or transmit” decision. A low-dimensional feature map, invariant under the symmetries of the problem, replaces the raw state–configuration encoding. In experiments on 300 held-out environments, the resulting policies transfer to instance sizes never seen in training, and already 𝑁 = 2 reduces the upper semideviation of the outcome distribution while simultaneously improving its mean whenever the simulator is misspecified— an empirical counterpart of the duality between coherent risk measures and distributional robustness. 

Keywords : Dynamic Risk Measures, Reinforcement Learning, Function Approximation, Robot Naviga-tion. 

# 1 Introduction 

We consider a Markov decision process (MDP) operating in time 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2 . . . , with a finite state space 

X = {1, . . . , 𝑛 }, which may be very large, and the action space U, which is finite as well and practically possible to enumerate. The feasible control set is 𝑈 : X ⇒ U, and the controlled transition kernel is 

P : X × U → P (X) , where P (X) denotes the set of probability distributions on X. We use 𝜋 𝑡 to denote the decision rule to choose the control 𝑢 𝑡 at time 𝑡 . In general, 𝜋 𝑡 may be a function of (𝑥 0, 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑡 ),the states visited at times 0 , 1, . . . , 𝑡 , and produce a probability distribution on 𝑈 (𝑥 𝑡 ), but we shall be 

> ∗

Department of Management Science and Information Systems, Rutgers University, email: ap2475@scarletmail.rutgers.edu; rusz@rutgers.edu 

1arXiv:2609.07998v1 [cs.AI] 7 Sep 2026 mainly concerned with stationary deterministic Markov policies , in which 𝑢 𝑡 = 𝜋 (𝑥 𝑡 ) with a stationary (time-invariant) decision rule 𝜋 .For any stationary deterministic Markov policy 𝛱 = {𝜋, 𝜋, . . . }, and any initial state 𝑥 0, the sequence of states {𝑥 𝑡 }𝑡 =0,1,... is a Markov chain, with the transition probability matrix P𝜋 having rows P𝜋 𝑥 =

P(𝑥, 𝜋 (𝑥 )) , 𝑥 ∈ X . At each time 𝑡 = 0, 1, . . . , if the state is 𝑥 𝑡 and the control is 𝑢 𝑡 , a cost 𝑐 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 𝑡 ) is incurred, where 𝑐 : X × U → R. Thus, under a Markov policy 𝛱 , the resulting sequence of costs is 

𝑐 𝜋 (𝑥 𝑡 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝜋 (𝑥 𝑡 )) , 𝑡 = 0, 1, . . . . In standard formulations (see, e.g. , [37, 5]), the objective is to find a control policy that minimizes or maximizes the expected (discounted) sum or the expected average of stage-wise costs or rewards over a finite or infinite horizon: 

𝑣 𝜋 (𝑥 ) = E

n ∞∑︁ 

> 𝑡 =0

𝛼 𝑡 𝑐 𝜋 (𝑥 𝑡 ) 𝑥 0 = 𝑥 

o

, 𝛼 ∈ ( 0, 1). (1) Instead of the standard expected-value objective, we are considering a risk-averse model with a dynamic risk measure, 

𝑉 𝜋 (𝑥 ) = 𝜌 0,∞

𝑐 𝜋 (𝑥 𝑡 ) ∞

> 𝑡 =0



, 𝑥 0 = 𝑥, (2) used to evaluate the quality of the control policy. The operator 𝜌 0,∞ ( · ) assigns a real number representing a risk-adjusted total cost to a sequence of random costs. The objective is to minimize (2) over the space of all feasible policies. Our choice of the minimization formulation is motivated by the convenience of dealing with risk measures and their convexity, but all our results can be easily translated to the maximization setting, with concave risk measures. Our plan is to use mini-batch Markov risk measures, recently explored in [41] combined with Q-factor approximations, allowing for a very large state space. While [41] focused on linear value function approximations, we will explore the use of deep Q-networks to find a risk-averse control policy. Several works introduce models of risk into reinforcement learning: exponential utility functions [6, 7, 4, 17] and mean-variance models [46, 36]. A few later studies propose heuristic approaches involving specific coherent risk measures, such as CVaR in the objective or constraints [10, 11, 29]. Generative model value iteration with coherent measures was analyzed by Yu et al. [54]. Risk-aware Q-learning with Markov risk measures is considered by Huang and Haskell [21]. All these methods apply to problems with a small number of state-action pairs allowing exhaustive experimentation. Value function approximations in the context of distributionally robust MDPs were considered by Tamar et al. [47]. Tamar et al. [48] study the policy gradient approach for Markov risk measures and use it in an actor–critic type algorithm. Both approaches are heuristic. Policy evaluation with linear architecture and Markov risk measures by a method of temporal differences was analyzed by Köse and Ruszczyński [25], and asymptotic convergence was proved. The recent work of Yin et al. [52] uses variance to control the value iteration procedure. Refs. [18, 19] focus exclusively on the entropic risk measure, but derive theoretically sound and near-optimal regret bounds. Recently, Lam et al. [27] proposed a version of a risk-aware reinforcement learning method with coherent risk measures and function approximation. However, at each iteration, it uses extensive experimentation (double sampling) to statistically estimate the risk with high accuracy and high probability at each state-control pair. Our contribution is threefold. First, on the modeling side, we identify the structure of the mini-batch transition risk mapping generated by the worst-case base mapping: it is a distortion risk measure with a concave distortion, equivalently a spectral measure belonging to the extended Gini family, whose Kusuoka representation is an explicit Beta mixture of Average Values-at-Risk (Proposition 3.1). In particular, the family is increasing in the batch size 𝑁 , it converges to the worst-case mapping, and each of its members is consistent with second-order stochastic dominance. The batch size 𝑁 is thus not merely an algorithmic parameter; it indexes a one-parameter family of coherent measures with a transparent economic meaning, and it is this structure that makes a single sample sufficient for an unbiased estimate. 

2Second, on the algorithmic side, we combine the mini-batch mapping with a double deep Q-network. We show that the estimation bias splits into an action-selection bias, which the double-network construc-tion removes, and a residual bias caused by the propagation of approximation noise through a convex mapping, which has the opposite sign (Remark 4.1). The resulting scheme requires no double sampling and no accurate pointwise risk estimation at each state-control pair. Third, on the computational side, we solve a risk-averse underwater robot navigation problem whose state space is far beyond the reach of tabular methods. Two devices prove essential: a hierarchical decomposition, which delegates the deterministic path-execution subproblem to an exact graph search, and a feature map invariant under the symmetry group of the problem, which allows a single trained network to be applied to instances of a size never seen in training. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 recalls Markov risk measures and risk-averse dynamic programming. Section 3 introduces the mini-batch transition risk mappings and establishes their structure. Section 4 develops the risk-averse deep Q-learning method. Sections 5 and 6 present the robot navigation model and the numerical results, and Section 7 concludes. 

# 2 Markov Risk Measures and Risk-Averse Dynamic Programming 

In order to obtain a dynamic programming formulation, we focus on Markov risk measures , introduced in [38] and further developed in [16, 13]. Denote by V △

= R| X | the space of functions of the state. The key role in this theory is played by a transition risk mapping 𝜎 : X × P (X) × V → R which fully characterizes such a risk measure and allows for the formulation of the policy evaluation equation :

𝑉 𝜋 (𝑥 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝜋 (𝑥 )) + 𝛼𝜎  𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝜋 (𝑥 )) , 𝑉 𝜋 , 𝑥 ∈ X . (3) In such an MDP, a Markovian optimal policy 𝜋 ★ exists, and the corresponding optimal value function 

𝑉 ★( · ) satisfies the risk-averse dynamic programming equation :

𝑉 ★(𝑥 ) = min  

> 𝑢 ∈ U ( 𝑥 )

n

𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼𝜎  𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ★o

, 𝑥 ∈ X . (4) The policy 𝜋 ★ is given by the minimizers in (4). The Q-factors for a risk-averse model are defined in a way similar to the risk-neutral case: 

𝑄 𝜋 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼𝜎  𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 𝜋 ,𝑄 ★(𝑥, 𝑢 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼𝜎  𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ★;therefore, 𝑉 𝜋 (𝑥 ) = 𝑄 𝜋 (𝑥, 𝜋 (𝑥 )) and 𝑉 ★(𝑥 ) = min 𝑢 ∈ U ( 𝑥 ) 𝑄 ★(𝑥, 𝑢 ). The Q-factors are elements of the space Q △

= R| X | × | U | .A simple example of a transition risk mapping is the conditional expected value: 

𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) = P𝑉 . (5) Its use reduces (3)–(4) to the standard expected-value dynamic programming. More interesting are the risk mappings that depend on the transition kernel and the value function in a nonlinear way. An example is the mean–semideviation model [34]: 

𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) = P𝑉 + 𝜅 ∑︁  

> 𝑦 ∈ X

P(𝑦 ) max  0, 𝑉 (𝑦 ) − P𝑉 , 𝜅 ∈ [ 0, 1]. (6) Another example, rarely used in risk-measure theory due to its conservative nature, is the worst-case 

mapping: 

𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) = inf 𝑏 ∈ R : P[𝑉 ≤ 𝑏 ] = 1 = ess sup 

> P

𝑉 . (7) 

3All examples above, as functionals of the value function 𝑉 ( · ) , with a fixed P = P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), satisfy the axioms of a coherent measure of risk [2]: 

Convexity: 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝜆𝑉 + ( 1 − 𝜆 )𝑊 ) ≤ 𝜆𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) + ( 1 − 𝜆 )𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑊 ), ∀ 𝜆 ∈ [ 0, 1];

Monotonicity: If 𝑉 ≤ 𝑊 then 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) ≤ 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑊 );

Translation: 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 + 𝑎 1) = 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) + 𝑎 , for all 𝑎 ∈ R (here, 1 is the vector of 1’s); 

Positive homogeneity: 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑠𝑉 ) = 𝑠 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ), for all 𝑠 ≥ 0. For such transition risk mappings, the dual representation is valid: 

𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) = max 

n

Q𝑉 : dQ

dP ∈ A 

o

, (8) with some convex and closed set A of densities; see [40] and the comprehensive exposition in [13, Ch. 2]. The set A depends on P, in general. Formula (8) is the precise sense in which risk aversion and distributional robustness are two descriptions of the same object: a coherent transition risk mapping is a worst case over an ambiguity set of kernels, which is the model postulated in the robust dynamic programming of [22, 33]. We shall return to this reading when interpreting the numerical results in Section 6. Monotonicity and translation equivariance imply that every coherent transition risk mapping is nonexpansive in the supremum norm, 

𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) − 𝜎 (𝑥, P, 𝑊 ) ≤ ∥ 𝑉 − 𝑊 ∥∞, 𝑉, 𝑊 ∈ V , (9) so the operators on the right-hand sides of (3) and (4) are contractions with modulus 𝛼 ; this is the reason why these equations have unique solutions and why the corresponding value and policy iteration methods converge [38, 39]. Convex combinations of coherent measures of risk are coherent. In particular, we may mix the worst case mapping with the expected value. 

# 3 Mini-Batch Transition Risk Mappings 

Because of the nonlinear dependence of the transition risk mappings on the probability measure, their statistical estimation is challenging. To address this issue, we adapt to our case the construction of mini-batch risk forms from [12]. For a sample 𝑌 1: 𝑁 = (𝑌 1, . . . , 𝑌 𝑁 ) with 𝑁 independent observations of the next state distributed according to P(𝑥, 𝑢 ) in X, we consider a random empirical measure P( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, 𝑢 ) =

> 1
> 𝑁

Í𝑁 𝑗 =1 𝛿 𝑌 𝑗 (each 𝛿 𝑌 𝑗 is the unit mass at 𝑌 𝑗 ). Then, for a fixed coherent transition risk mapping 

𝜎 b (𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ), we consider the random mapping 𝜎 b (𝑥, P( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ). Its expected value is a new coherent transition risk mapping 

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ) = E𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼P( 𝑥,𝑢 ) 𝑁 

𝜎 b (𝑥, P( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ) . (10) An essential virtue of this construction is that we can write 𝜎 b (𝑥, P( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ) as a function of 𝑁 values: 

𝑉 (𝑌 𝑗 ), 𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 , at the batch 𝑌 1: 𝑁 .The verification that 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), · ) is coherent is straightforward, directly from the four axioms. Evidently, if 𝜎 b (𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), · ) is the conditional expectation (5), the mini-batch mapping (10) is the same, due to the tower property. However, in the examples (6) and (7), the formula (10) defines new transition risk mappings. Thanks to the small batch involved and the use of the expectation, their statistical estimation and learning become tractable, as we shall demonstrate below. Particularly convenient is the mini-batch counterpart of the worst-case mapping (7): 

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 ) = E𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼P( 𝑥,𝑢 ) 𝑁 

max 1≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 𝑉 (𝑌 𝑗 ) . (11) 

4Even for 𝑁 = 2 it defines a nontrivial yet tractable model of risk aversion. We do not consider 𝑁 → ∞ ,but rather work with a fixed and very small 𝑁 .The following proposition identifies the mapping (11) within the classical taxonomy of risk measures. It shows that the batch size 𝑁 is not merely an algorithmic parameter, but indexes a one-parameter family of distortion measures of risk, with a Kusuoka representation available in closed form. 

Proposition 3.1. Fix 𝑥 ∈ X and 𝑢 ∈ U ( 𝑥 ), write P = P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), and regard 𝑉 ∈ V as a random variable on the probability space (X , 2X , P), with the distribution function 𝐹 𝑉 and the quantile function 𝐹 −1 

> 𝑉

.Then the mapping (11) has the following properties. 

(i) It is a Choquet integral with respect to the distorted probability 𝑔 𝑁 ◦ P, with the distortion function 

𝑔 𝑁 (𝑠 ) = 1 − ( 1 − 𝑠 )𝑁 :

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) =

∫ ∞

> 0

𝑔 𝑁 

 P{𝑉 > 𝜏 } d𝜏 +

∫ 0

> −∞

h

𝑔 𝑁 

 P{𝑉 > 𝜏 } − 1

i

d𝜏. 

As 𝑔 𝑁 is increasing and concave, with 𝑔 𝑁 (0) = 0 and 𝑔 𝑁 (1) = 1, the mapping 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, · ) is a coherent, law invariant, and comonotone additive measure of risk. 

(ii) It is a spectral measure of risk with the nondecreasing spectrum 𝜙 𝑁 (𝑠 ) = 𝑁 𝑠 𝑁 −1, and, for 𝑁 ≥ 2,its Kusuoka representation is the Beta mixture of Average Values-at-Risk: 

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) =

∫ 10

𝑁 𝑠 𝑁 −1 𝐹 −1 

> 𝑉

(𝑠 ) d𝑠 =

∫ 10

AV @R𝛽 (𝑉 ) 𝜇 𝑁 (d𝛽 ),

where 

𝜇 𝑁 (d𝛽 ) = 𝑁 (𝑁 − 1) 𝛽 𝑁 −2 (1 − 𝛽 ) d𝛽, 

that is, 𝜇 𝑁 is the Beta (𝑁 − 1, 2) distribution. 

(iii) For 𝑁 = 2,

𝜎 (2) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) = E[𝑉 ] + 12 E 𝑉 (𝑌 1) − 𝑉 (𝑌 2) = E[𝑉 ] + 𝛤 (𝑉 ),

where 𝛤 ( · ) is one half of Gini’s mean difference. Consequently, the mixed mapping appearing in (12) 

with 𝑁 = 2 is the mean–Gini model E[𝑉 ] + 𝜘 𝛤 (𝑉 ).

(iv) The family is nondecreasing in the batch size and exhausts the worst case: 

P𝑉 = 𝜎 (1) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) ≤ 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) ≤ 𝜎 ( 𝑁 +1) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) ≤ ess sup 

> P

𝑉, 

and 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) ↑ ess sup P 𝑉 as 𝑁 → ∞ .

(v) Every member of the family is consistent with second order stochastic dominance: if 𝑉 ⪯icx 𝑊 ,where ⪯icx denotes the increasing convex order, which is the dominance relation appropriate for costs, then 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) ≤ 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑊 ).Proof. (i) For every 𝜏 ∈ R, by the independence of 𝑌 1, . . . , 𝑌 𝑁 ,

P

n

max     

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 (𝑌 𝑗 ) > 𝜏 

o

= 1 −  1 − P{𝑉 > 𝜏 } 𝑁 = 𝑔 𝑁 

 P{𝑉 > 𝜏 },

and the displayed formula is the representation of the expected value of max 1≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 𝑉 (𝑌 𝑗 ). Moreover, 

𝑔 ′ 

> 𝑁

(𝑠 ) = 𝑁 (1 − 𝑠 )𝑁 −1 > 0 and 𝑔 ′′  

> 𝑁

(𝑠 ) = −𝑁 (𝑁 − 1)( 1 − 𝑠 )𝑁 −2 ≤ 0 on [0, 1). Coherence, law invariance, and comonotone additivity of Choquet integrals with concave distortion functions are classical; see [13, Ch. 2] and [20]. (ii) We use the spectral representation of law invariant comonotone additive coherent measures of risk [26, 1]. The distribution function of max 1≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 𝑉 (𝑌 𝑗 ) is 𝐹 𝑁 𝑉 , and its quantile function is 𝑠 ↦ → 𝐹 −1 

> 𝑉

(𝑠 1/𝑁 ).

5Hence 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ) = ∫ 10 𝐹 −1 

> 𝑉

(𝑠 1/𝑁 ) d𝑠 , and the substitution 𝑠 = 𝑣 𝑁 yields the spectral form. Since AV @R𝛽 is the spectral measure with the spectrum 𝑢 ↦ → 1[𝛽, 1] (𝑠 )/( 1 − 𝛽 ), a mixture ∫ 10 AV @R𝛽 ( · ) 𝜇 (d𝛽 )

has the spectrum 𝜙 (𝑠 ) = ∫ 

> [0,𝑠 ]

(1 − 𝛽 )−1 𝜇 (d𝛽 ); therefore 𝜇 (d𝛽 ) = (1 − 𝛽 )𝜙 ′ (𝛽 ) d𝛽 , with no atom at 0 because 𝜙 𝑁 (0) = 0 for 𝑁 ≥ 2. Substituting 𝜙 ′ 

> 𝑁

(𝛽 ) = 𝑁 (𝑁 − 1) 𝛽 𝑁 −2 gives 𝜇 𝑁 , whose total mass is 

𝑁 (𝑁 − 1)𝐵 (𝑁 − 1, 2) = 1. (iii) Immediate from max (𝑎, 𝑏 ) = 12 (𝑎 + 𝑏 ) + 12 |𝑎 − 𝑏 | and the fact that 𝑌 1 and 𝑌 2 are independent copies. (iv) We have 𝑔 𝑁 ≤ 𝑔 𝑁 +1 pointwise on [0, 1], and the Choquet integral is monotone with respect to the distortion function; the limit follows from max 1≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 𝑉 (𝑌 𝑗 ) ↑ ess sup P 𝑉 almost surely and monotone convergence. (v) For 𝑁 > 1, by (ii), 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) is a mixture of the mappings AV @R𝛽 , each of which is consistent with the increasing convex order [35, 13]. □

Part (iii) deserves emphasis. Combining (11) with the conditional expectation with the weight 

𝜘 ∈ [ 0, 1], as we do in (12) below, produces for 𝑁 = 2 the mean–Gini model, one of the oldest mean–risk models known to be consistent with second order dominance [53, 35], and the admissible range 𝜘 ∈ [ 0, 1]

is exactly the range in which that consistency was established. The choice 𝑁 = 2, which we make in all our experiments, is therefore not a computational compromise: it delivers a classical and well-understood model of risk at the cost of two next-state samples per transition. We also obtain the Q-factors: 

𝑄 𝜋 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼 E𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼P( 𝑥,𝑢 ) 𝑁 

h

(1 − 𝜘 ) 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑉 𝜋 (𝑌 𝑗 ) + 𝜘 max    

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 𝜋 (𝑌 𝑗 )

i

,𝑄 ★(𝑥, 𝑢 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼 E𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼P( 𝑥,𝑢 ) 𝑁 

h

(1 − 𝜘 ) 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑉 ★(𝑌 𝑗 ) + 𝜘 max    

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 ★(𝑌 𝑗 )

i

.

(12) Being expectations, they admit simple unbiased estimators: 

e𝑄 𝜋 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼 

h

(1 − 𝜘 ) 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑉 𝜋 (𝑌 𝑗 ) + 𝜘 max    

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 𝜋 (𝑌 𝑗 )

i

,

e𝑄 ★(𝑥, 𝑢 ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼 

h

(1 − 𝜘 ) 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑉 ★(𝑌 𝑗 ) + 𝜘 max    

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 ★(𝑌 𝑗 )

i

.

Here and below, 𝜘 is the weight of the worst-case component. Both estimators are unbiased, conditionally on (𝑥, 𝑢 ), and each of them uses one single batch of 𝑁 next states. This is the decisive computational advantage of the construction (10): no double sampling and no pointwise estimation of a nonlinear functional of the transition kernel are needed. 

# 4 Risk-Averse Q-Learning with Double Deep Q-Networks 

As in the expected-value case, the direct application of the Q-factors (12) is limited to small state and action spaces. In our application to be discussed in the next sections the tabular approach is out of the question, and we resort to functional approximations within a pre-specified parametric function class. Linear value function approximation approaches to MDPs have a long history; see [8, 43, 49, 44, 30] and many references therein. The concept of a linear (mixture) MDP [8, 30], originating from the theory of linear bandits [9, 28], is pertinent in this setting. It has been recently used by [3, 51, 23, 32] to develop 

6complexity bounds for expected value RL algorithms. The generalization to bilinear models by [15] extends the applicability of this class. The state aggregation or lumping approaches of [14, 24] are also related to this model. In [41], we used a linear functional model to approximate the mini-batch policy value function (3) within a policy iteration method, and we proved statistical error bounds of these approximations. Now, we intend to adapt the techniques of deep neural networks within a Q-learning scheme. We approximate the optimal Q-factors 𝑄 ★(𝑥, 𝑢 ) by a neural network 𝑄 𝜃 : X×U → R with parameters 

𝜃 ∈ R𝑑 , and introduce a second target network 𝑄 𝜃 − with parameters 𝜃 − , periodically synchronized with 

𝜃 . The rationale for maintaining two networks, the Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) architecture of van Hasselt et al. [50], stems from the systematic bias inherent in single-network Q-learning. Using the same parameter vector for both action selection and action evaluation, and assuming that 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑦, 𝑢 ′) is an unbiased estimator of 𝑄 ★(𝑦, 𝑢 ′) for each fixed 𝑢 ′, Jensen’s inequality applied to the concave function min yields 

E min    

> 𝑢 ′∈ U ( 𝑦 )

𝑄 𝜃 (𝑦, 𝑢 ′) ≤ min    

> 𝑢 ′∈ U ( 𝑦 )

E𝑄 𝜃 (𝑦, 𝑢 ′) = min    

> 𝑢 ′∈ U ( 𝑦 )

𝑄 ★(𝑦, 𝑢 ′).

In the maximization convention of van Hasselt et al. [50] this is the familiar overestimation bias; in our minimization convention it appears as a systematic underestimation of the optimal cost-to-go, that is, as unwarranted optimism. Its effect is unfavorable in either convention: the target is biased towards the appearance of a better policy than the one actually available. In the risk-averse setting a second and distinct source of bias is present. The sample estimator e𝑄 ★ of Section 3 involves two optimizations: (i) action selection via 𝑉 ★(𝑦 ) = min 𝑢 ′ 𝑄 ★(𝑦, 𝑢 ′), and (ii) the worst-case term max 1≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 𝑉 ★(𝑌 𝑗 ) of the mini-batch risk mapping (11). The DDQN prescription addresses (i) directly, as we now describe; source (ii) is of a different nature and is analyzed in Remark 4.1 below. Recall that the optimal value function satisfies 𝑉 ★(𝑦 ) = min 𝑢 ′ ∈ U ( 𝑦 ) 𝑄 ★(𝑦, 𝑢 ′). The DDQN estimator of this quantity decouples selection from evaluation: 

𝑉 dq (𝑦 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − ) = 𝑄 𝜃 −



𝑦, argmin   

> 𝑢 ′∈ U ( 𝑦 )

𝑄 𝜃 (𝑦, 𝑢 ′)



. (13) The online network 𝜃 identifies the greedy action; the target network 𝜃 − evaluates its worth. This separa-tion removes the correlation between the selected action and its estimated value that drives overestimation. Given a mini-batch of next states 𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼P(𝑥, 𝑢 )𝑁 , we substitute 𝑉 dq for 𝑉 ★ in the sample estimator 

e𝑄 ★, obtaining the risk-averse DDQN Bellman target 

T ( 𝑥, 𝑢, 𝑌 1: 𝑁 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − ) = 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) + 𝛼 



(1 − 𝜘 ) 1

𝑁 

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝑉 dq (𝑌 𝑗 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − ) + 𝜘 max     

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 dq (𝑌 𝑗 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − )



. (14) Here 𝛼 ∈ ( 0, 1] is the discount factor. Taking expectations over 𝑌 1: 𝑁 in (14) recovers the mini-batch Q-factor associated with the mapping (10), confirming consistency of the target with the coherent risk structure established in Section 3. 

Remark 4.1. The term max 1≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝑁 𝑉 dq (𝑌 𝑗 ) maximizes over realized next states , and not over competing action-value estimates. Conditionally on (𝜃, 𝜃 − ), the function 𝑦 ↦ → 𝑉 dq (𝑦 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − ) is deterministic, and therefore 

E𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼P( 𝑥,𝑢 ) 𝑁 

h

max     

> 1≤𝑗 ≤𝑁

𝑉 dq (𝑌 𝑗 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − )

i

= 𝜎 ( 𝑁 )  𝑥, P(𝑥, 𝑢 ), 𝑉 dq 

holds exactly . The batch maximum is thus an unbiased estimator of the mini-batch risk mapping evaluated at the current approximation. This property, established in Section 3, makes the whole scheme implementable. 

7What remains is the propagation of the approximation error 𝑉 dq − 𝑉 ★ through 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) . By (9), this error is not amplified, 

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 dq ) − 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 ★) ≤ ∥ 𝑉 dq − 𝑉 ★∥∞.

Its expectation with respect to the randomness of training, denoted E𝜃 , does not vanish, however: since 

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, · ) is convex, Jensen’s inequality gives 

E𝜃 

𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) (𝑥, P, 𝑉 dq ) ≥ 𝜎 ( 𝑁 )  𝑥, P, E𝜃 [𝑉 dq ],

so that zero-mean noise in the value estimates contributes a nonnegative, that is, pessimistic bias propor-tional to 𝜘 . It is worth stressing that this bias has the sign opposite to the optimism of the single-network target discussed above. Because the target (14) requires 𝑁 next-state samples per state-action pair, experience tuples stored in the replay buffer D take the form 

𝑒 =  𝑥, 𝑢, 𝑐, 𝑌 1: 𝑁 , 𝑌 1: 𝑁 ∼ P(𝑥, 𝑢 )𝑁 .

In simulation-based settings the 𝑁 samples are drawn directly from the transition kernel. Given a training mini-batch B ⊂ D of 𝐾 experience tuples, the empirical squared-error loss is 

L( 𝜃 ; 𝜃 − ) = 1

𝐾 ∑︁ ( 𝑥,𝑢,𝑐,𝑌 1: 𝑁 ) ∈ B 

h

T ( 𝑥, 𝑢, 𝑌 1: 𝑁 ; 𝜃, 𝜃 − ) − 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑥, 𝑢 )

i2

. (15) The gradient ∇𝜃 L is computed treating 𝜃 − as a constant, so the Bellman target (14) does not propagate gradients through the target network. This “stop-gradient” convention, standard since [31], ensures the regression target remains stationary across each gradient step, stabilizing training. Setting 𝜘 = 0 reduces (14) to the standard DDQN target with 𝑁 averaged next states, which collapses to the classical DDQN of van Hasselt et al. [50] when 𝑁 = 1. Setting 𝜘 = 1 and letting 𝑁 → ∞ 

recovers a purely worst-case, that is, robust target, by Proposition 3.1(iv). The pair (𝜘, 𝑁 ) thus provides two complementary dials: 𝜘 interpolates linearly between risk-neutral expected-cost minimization and the extended Gini mean of order 𝑁 , while 𝑁 controls how far that mean is displaced towards the upper tail. Both preserve the coherence and the dominance consistency established in Section 3, and the corresponding Bellman operator remains an 𝛼 -contraction by (9). Algorithm 1 presents the outline of our idea. 

# 5 Risk-Aware Underwater Robot Navigation 

In this and the following sections we consider the underwater robot navigation problem discussed in [41]. We formulate it as a Markov decision process and apply the mini-batch transition risk framework developed in the preceding sections to obtain a risk-averse control policy. 

## 5.1 Problem Overview 

The robot operates in a hazardous underwater environment. Its task is to visit a set of collection points ,gather stochastic information payloads, and transmit them at designated transmission points , while avoiding known obstacle zones. The robot is subject to systematic risk : at each time step it is destroyed with probability 𝛿 ∈ ( 0, 1), independently of its action. The objective is to minimize the cumulative risk of information loss while completing the mission efficiently. Throughout, 𝛿 denotes this destruction probability and 𝛼 the discount factor of Sections 2–4. The environment is modeled as a closed, connected rectangular grid G ⊂ Z2. The following disjoint subsets of G are fixed throughout an episode: 

8Algorithm 1: Risk-Averse DDQN with Mini-Batch Transition Risk 

Input: Mini-batch size 𝑁 , replay buffer capacity, training batch size 𝐾 , target update period 𝜏 , risk weight 𝜘 ∈ [ 0, 1], discount 𝛼 , learning rate 𝛽 , exploration schedule {𝜀 𝑡 }

Initialize online network 𝑄 𝜃 ; set 𝜃 − ← 𝜃 ;Initialize replay buffer D ← ∅ ;

for each episode do 

Observe initial state 𝑥 0;

for each step 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2, . . . do 

With prob. 𝜀 𝑡 select 𝑢 𝑡 at random; otherwise 𝑢 𝑡 ← argmin 𝑢 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 );Execute 𝑢 𝑡 ; observe cost 𝑐 𝑡 ; draw 𝑌 1: 𝑁 𝑡 ∼ P(𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 𝑡 )𝑁 ;Store (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝑌 1: 𝑁 𝑡 ) in D;Sample training batch B = {( 𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑢 𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑖 , 𝑌 1: 𝑁 𝑖 )} 𝐾 𝑖 =1 from D;

for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 do 

𝑢 ★𝑖 𝑗 ← argmin 𝑢 ′ ∈ U ( 𝑌 𝑗 𝑖 ) 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑌 𝑗 𝑖 , 𝑢 ′), 𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 ;

𝑉 dq  

> 𝑖 𝑗

← 𝑄 𝜃 − (𝑌 𝑗 𝑖 , 𝑢 ★𝑖 𝑗 ), 𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 ;

T𝑖 ← 𝑐 𝑖 + 𝛼 (1 − 𝜘 ) 1

> 𝑁

Í 𝑗 𝑉 dq  

> 𝑖 𝑗

+ 𝜘 max 𝑗 𝑉 dq 

> 𝑖 𝑗

;

L( 𝜃 ; 𝜃 − ) ← 1

> 𝐾

Í𝐾 𝑖 =1

T𝑖 − 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑢 𝑖 )2 (T𝑖 treated as a constant); 

𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝛽 ∇𝜃 L( 𝜃 ; 𝜃 − );

if 𝑡 mod 𝜏 = 0 then 

𝜃 − ← 𝜃 (hard update) or 𝜃 − ← ( 1 − 𝜌 ) 𝜃 − + 𝜌 𝜃 (soft update); 

• Collection points C ⊂ G : locations where information is gathered. 

• Transmission points R ⊂ G : locations where carried information is offloaded. 

• Obstacles O ⊂ G : locations the robot must not enter; C, R, and O are pairwise disjoint. They constitute the configuration E of the problem. At each collection point, a visit yields high-value information 𝐼 𝐻 with probability 1 − 𝑝 and low-value information 𝐼 𝐿 < 𝐼 𝐻 with probability 𝑝 . Formally, the collected payload is the random variable 

𝐼 obs =

(

𝐼 𝐿 , with probability 𝑝, 𝐼 𝐻 , with probability 1 − 𝑝. 

The set of attainable accumulated information payloads is I ⊂ R+.

Action space. The robot’s action space U = M ∪ { 𝑎 𝑐 , 𝑎 𝑡 } consists of three components: 

• Movement (M): The set M = {− 1, 0, 1}2 \ {( 0, 0)} comprises eight directions (N, NE, E, SE, S, SW, W, NW). Movement to an obstacle cell or outside G is inadmissible. 

• Collect (𝑎 𝑐 ): Available when the robot occupies a collection point 𝑔 ∈ C . Executing 𝑎 𝑐 draws 𝐼 obs 

from the Bernoulli mixture above and adds it to the robot’s carried payload 𝐼 carry .

• Transmit (𝑎 𝑡 ): Available when the robot occupies a transmission point 𝑔 ∈ R and 𝐼 carry > 0. Executing 𝑎 𝑡 delivers the payload and resets 𝐼 carry to zero. 

9A state 𝑥 ∈ X is a tuple 

𝑥 =  𝑔 𝑟 , v, 𝐼 carry 

,

where 𝑔 𝑟 ∈ G is the robot’s current grid position, v ∈ { 0, 1}| C | is a binary vector whose 𝑖 -th entry equals 1 if collection point 𝑐 𝑖 has not yet been visited, and 𝐼 carry ∈ I is the payload currently held. The configuration E = (C , R, O) is a fixed instance parameter, not a dynamic state. The state space is therefore 

X = G × { 0, 1}| C | × I .

The episode terminates when the robot is destroyed or it enters the terminal state space 

X𝑇 = G × { 0}| C | × { 0},

which encodes the condition that all collection points have been visited and no payload remains to be transmitted. 

## 5.2 Cost Structure 

The one-step cost 𝑐 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) is the sum of the component costs defined below. Since the collection cost depends on the stochastic payload 𝐼 obs , the transition risk mapping 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) of Section 3 acts on the next-state value function and implicitly aggregates this randomness. 

• Collection cost. Executing 𝑎 𝑐 at a collection point incurs a cost proportional to the realized payload: 

𝐶 collect = 𝑐 𝑜 + 𝑘 𝑜 𝐼 obs ,

where 𝑐 𝑜 ≥ 0 is a fixed observation overhead and 𝑘 𝑜 > 0 is the per-unit information loss rate. Since 

𝐼 obs is random, 𝐶 collect is a random variable with expectation 𝑐 𝑜 + 𝑘 𝑜 

𝑝 𝐼 𝐿 + ( 1 − 𝑝 ) 𝐼 𝐻 

.

• Movement cost. Each movement step incurs a cost proportional to the carried payload, with two regimes. In the survival regime used during training, the cost is weighted by the probability of surviving the step: 

𝐶 surv move = (1 − 𝛿 )  𝑐 𝑚 + 𝑘 𝑚 𝐼 carry 

,

where 𝑐 𝑚 ≥ 0 is a base transit cost and 𝑘 𝑚 > 0 is the per-unit information loss rate. In the 

destruction regime used for scenario-based evaluation, the full cost is incurred unconditionally, reflecting total loss upon destruction: 

𝐶 destr move = 𝑐 𝑚 + 𝑘 𝑚 𝐼 carry .

• Transmission cost. Executing 𝑎 𝑡 at a transmission point yields a negative cost (reward) equal to the delivered payload. Arriving at a transmission point without a payload incurs a penalty 𝐶 none ≥ 0: 

𝐶 transmit =

(

−𝐼 carry , if 𝐼 carry > 0,𝐶 none , otherwise. 

Remark 5.1. Destruction is modeled in the standard way, by adjoining an absorbing state 𝔡 with 𝑉 (𝔡 ) = 0and letting the kernel place the mass 𝛿 on 𝔡 at every step. If 𝜎 is the conditional expectation (5), this device is exactly equivalent to evaluating the surviving trajectory with the discount factor 𝛼 = 1 − 𝛿 ; this is the classical equivalence between killing and discounting [37]. For a nonlinear transition risk mapping the equivalence fails. Absorbing the destruction probability into a scalar discount factor is therefore an approximation whose error grows with 𝜘 and 𝑁 . For the value 𝑁 = 2 used throughout our experiments the discrepancy is modest, but it is not zero, and it is one of the reasons why in Section 6 we evaluate the learned policies under explicitly simulated destruction events, rather than only under the model on which they were trained. 

10 5.3 Decomposed Training Methodology 

A monolithic DQN operating on the full action space U over X failed to learn a viable policy: joint exploration of spatial and task decisions within various configurations creates a problem that standard experience replay does not resolve within feasible training budgets. We therefore adopt a decomposed architecture separating high-level task decisions from low-level path execution. 

High-level decisions. At each decision epoch the agent selects a target —either the nearest unvisited collection point or the nearest transmission point—using a feature-based risk-averse DDQN as described in Section 4. 

Low-level path execution. Given the target, the sequence of movement actions navigating the robot from its current position to the target—while avoiding obstacles and respecting grid boundaries— is computed by a classical shortest-path algorithm. This sub-problem admits a known deterministic solution; delegating it to a classical planner eliminates function-approximation error and concentrates the learning budget on the genuinely uncertain high-level decisions. The low-level planning sub-problem is solved by the Dijkstra algorithm that finds a collision-free direction sequence from the current cell to the target cell. It is preferred over learning-based alternatives because obstacle avoidance on a finite, fully observed grid is a deterministic problem for which graph search is exact, interpretable, and computationally negligible relative to the learning component. Full details appear in section 5.4. The high-level decision is posed over the binary action space 

U𝐻 =  target the nearest 𝑐 ∈ C , target the nearest 𝑡 ∈ R ,

and the optimal Q-factors over U𝐻 are approximated by the risk-averse DDQN of Section 4 with the mini-batch target (14). 

Heuristic baseline policy. As a benchmark we consider the threshold policy 𝛱 (𝛾 ; ·) introduced in [41], 

𝛱 (𝛾 ; 𝑥 ) =



move to the nearest transmission point, if 𝐼 carry > 0 and 𝑑 C ≥ 𝛾 (C , R) 𝑑 R

𝐼 carry 

,

move to the nearest unvisited collection point, otherwise, where 𝑑 C and 𝑑 R are the shortest distances from the current position to the nearest unvisited collection point and to the nearest transmission point, respectively, and 𝛾 (C , R) > 0 is an instance-dependent threshold. The policy is applicable to any connected state space equipped with a suitable distance function. Calibrating 𝛾 requires policy iteration with line search, which is computationally expensive and yields a parameter that is instance-specific and non-transferable. We refer to [39] for details. The heuristic policy serves as a performance baseline against which the learned DDQN policy is compared. 

Feature representations. To assess the sensitivity of the DDQN approximation to the input encoding, we evaluate two feature representations derived from the state 𝑥 and the configuration E:

1) Raw state and configuration encoding. The instance and state data are flattened into a single input vector comprising one-hot encoding of the configuration E, concatenated with the state 𝑥 .

2) Engineered features. A compact feature vector is constructed from the following quantities, identified as most informative for the high-level decision through analysis and systematic experimentation: 

11 • Fraction of unvisited collection points, ∥v∥1/∥C∥ 1;

• Mean and standard deviation of pairwise distances among unvisited collection points; 

• Grid distance 𝑑 C and radial distance 𝑟 C to the nearest unvisited collection point; 

• Grid distance 𝑑 R and radial distance 𝑟 R to the nearest transmission point; 

• Carried payload 𝐼 carry ;

• Mean and standard deviation of the distance from each unvisited collection point to its nearest transmission point. The “grid distance” is understood as the length of the shortest path, with accounting of all obstacles. One of the important motives for selecting the engineered features was the observation that the problem, viewed abstractly on the unbounded lattice Z2, possesses an obvious symmetry group 𝐺 defined by the lattice translations, rotations, and reflections. Consequently, the optimal value function is invariant with respect to these operations, and the optimal policy – equivariant. The raw encoding does not reflect this structure: two geometrically identical states are mapped to different input vectors, and the network has to learn the invariance from the data, which inflates the sample requirement by a factor of order |𝐺 |. Every quantity in the list above, by contrast, is a 𝐺 -invariant of the pair (state, configuration): cardinalities, distances, and the moments of distance distributions are unchanged by isometries. The engineered representation therefore factors the learning problem through the quotient X/ 𝐺 . Moreover, because the high-level action set U𝐻 is defined intrinsically, by the nearest unvisited collection point and the nearest transmission point , rather than by grid directions, the induced policy is automatically equivariant, and none of the features depends on the size of the grid or on the number of collection points. The latter property is what makes the transfer to instance sizes never seen in training, reported in Section 6, possible at all. Results for both encodings are reported in Section 6; algorithmic details of the full training procedure appear in the Algorithm section. 

Remark 5.2. Selecting a target rather than a primitive move makes the high-level process a semi-Markov decision process, or, in the terminology of Sutton et al. [45], a decision process over options . A macro-action initiated at 𝑥 terminates after a random number 𝑘 (𝑥, 𝑢 ) of primitive steps, and in the expected-value case the correct Bellman target discounts by 𝛼 𝑘 ( 𝑥,𝑢 ) and accumulates the intermediate costs as Í𝑘 −1 

> 𝑖 =0

𝛼 𝑖 𝑐 𝑖 .In the risk-averse case the situation is more delicate: time consistency requires the option-level mapping to be the composition of the 𝑘 one-step mappings, and, unless 𝜎 is the conditional expectation, the composition of 𝑘 copies of 𝜎 is not 𝜎 applied to the accumulated cost. Two features of our model keep the discrepancy small. The low-level path is deterministic given the target, so that the only randomness inside a macro-action is the destruction event and the payload draw at the terminal cell of the path; and the movement costs are accumulated with the survival weighting of Section 5.2. 

## 5.4 Algorithm 

The reinforcement learning framework consists of two major components: (i) a path-finding module that computes the optimal navigation and control matrices in a grid-based environment (Algorithm 2), and (ii) Hierarchical Double Deep Q-Network (Algorithm 3). 

12 Algorithm 2: Path-Finding and Control Computation 

Input: Start point 𝑔 0, grid G, obstacle set O, move set M, norm order 𝑟 , maximum distance 𝑑 max 

Output: Distance matrix 𝐷 , action (control) matrix 𝐴 

Initialize 𝐷 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) ← 𝑑 max and 𝐴 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) ← ∅ for all (𝑥, 𝑦 ) ∈ G ;Set 𝐷 (𝑔 0) ← 0; Initialize candidate set 𝑄 ← G \ O ;

while 𝑄 not empty do 

Select (𝑥, 𝑦 ) = arg min (𝑖, 𝑗 ) ∈ 𝑄 𝐷 (𝑖, 𝑗 );

if 𝐷 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) ≥ 𝑑 max then terminate (graph not connected); Remove (𝑥, 𝑦 ) from 𝑄 ;

foreach 𝑚 ∈ M do 

Compute (𝑥 ′, 𝑦 ′) = (𝑥, 𝑦 ) + 𝑚 ;

if (𝑥 ′, 𝑦 ′) ∈ 𝑄 then 

˜𝑑 ← 𝐷 (𝑥, 𝑦 ) + ∥( 𝑥 ′, 𝑦 ′) − ( 𝑥, 𝑦 )∥ 𝑟 ;

if ˜𝑑 < 𝐷 (𝑥 ′, 𝑦 ′) then 

𝐷 (𝑥 ′, 𝑦 ′) ← ˜𝑑 ;

𝐴 (𝑥 ′, 𝑦 ′) ← 𝑚 ;

return 𝐷 , 𝐴 

# 6 Results 

## 6.1 Comparison of Learning via Different Feature Sets 

Using the training methodology described in Section 5.3, we simulate 𝐽 train = 8000 episodes over randomly generated configurations to train the neural network. Each episode is executed to completion without explicitly modeling destructive events during training; instead, the probability of destruction is absorbed into the discount factor, entering the learning objective in the standard way. The environment parameters and neural-network hyperparameters are summarized in Tables 1–3. To improve generalization, we investigate two feature-design strategies derived from the underlying state space: (i) raw features, consisting of the full state and configuration representation, and (ii) a curated set of task-relevant features selected to capture the most informative aspects of the environment while eliminating redundancy. Model performance while training is evaluated using training loss (to monitor convergence) and cumulative reward on a held-out validation set of 𝐽 val = 300 independently generated configurations, disjoint from the training data. The results, summarized in Figure 1, reveal a clear performance gap between the two representations. The model trained on raw features achieves a lower training loss but a markedly worse reward on the validation set — the classical signature of overfitting to a high-dimensional and highly redundant encoding. The dimension of the raw input, 5 𝑛 2 + 1, grows quadratically with the linear size of the grid, whereas the engineered input has a fixed dimension of 10; and, as observed in Section 5.3, the raw encoding separates states that belong to a single orbit of the symmetry group 𝐺 , so that the network must expend capacity on rediscovering an invariance that the engineered features possess by construction. The model trained on the curated features converges to a higher and visibly more stable reward, confirming that the domain knowledge encoded in the feature map reduces the effective complexity of the learning problem and improves out-of-sample performance. All subsequent experiments therefore adopt the curated feature representation. 

13 Algorithm 3: Hierarchical Risk-Averse DDQN with Mini-Batch Transition Risk 

Input: Mini-batch size 𝑁 , replay buffer capacity, training batch size 𝐾 , target update period 𝜏 , risk weight 𝜘 ∈ [ 0, 1], number of episodes 𝐽 train , discount 𝛼 , learning rate 𝛽 , exploration schedule {𝜀 𝑡 }

Initialize online network 𝑄 𝜃 ; set 𝜃 − ← 𝜃 ;Initialize replay buffer D ← ∅ ;

for 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝐽 train do 

Observe initial state 𝑥 0;

for each step 𝑡 = 0, 1, 2, . . . do Macro-action selection: 

With prob. 𝜀 𝑡 select 𝑢 macro  

> 𝑡

at random; otherwise 𝑢 macro  

> 𝑡

← argmin 𝑢 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 );

Micro-action execution: 

Determine primitive action 𝑢 𝑡 via shortest path policy (Algorithm 2 ) according to 𝑢 macro  

> 𝑡

;Execute 𝑢 𝑡 ; observe cost 𝑐 𝑡 ; draw 𝑌 1: 𝑁 𝑡 ∼ P(𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 𝑡 )𝑁 ;Store (𝑥 𝑡 , 𝑢 macro  

> 𝑡

, 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝑌 1: 𝑁 𝑡 ) in D;Sample training batch B = {( 𝑥 𝑘 , 𝑢 macro  

> 𝑘

, 𝑐 𝑘 , 𝑌 1: 𝑁 𝑘 )} 𝐾 𝑘 =1 from D;

for 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝐾 do 

𝑢 ★𝑘 𝑗 ← argmin 𝑢 ′ ∈ U ( 𝑌 𝑗 𝑘 ) 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑌 𝑗 𝑘 , 𝑢 ′), 𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 ;

𝑉 dq  

> 𝑘 𝑗

← 𝑄 𝜃 − (𝑌 𝑗 𝑘 , 𝑢 ★𝑘 𝑗 ), 𝑗 = 1, . . . , 𝑁 ;

Risk-averse target: 

T𝑘 ← 𝑐 𝑘 + 𝛼 (1 − 𝜘 ) 1

> 𝑁

Í 𝑗 𝑉 dq  

> 𝑘 𝑗

+ 𝜘 max 𝑗 𝑉 dq 

> 𝑘 𝑗



L( 𝜃 ; 𝜃 − ) ← 1

> 𝐾

Í𝐾 𝑘 =1

T𝑘 − 𝑄 𝜃 (𝑥 𝑘 , 𝑢 macro  

> 𝑘

)2;

𝜃 ← 𝜃 − 𝛽 ∇𝜃 L( 𝜃 ; 𝜃 − );

if 𝑖 mod 𝜏 = 0 then 

𝜃 − ← 𝜃 (hard update) or 𝜃 − ← ( 1 − 𝜌 ) 𝜃 − + 𝜌 𝜃 (soft update); 

Generalization Analysis We further evaluate the trained models on configurations outside the train-ing distribution by varying grid size, number of collection points, transmission nodes, and obstacles. The engineered-feature model consistently outperforms the raw-feature baseline across all settings, demon-strating strong scalability to problem instances with varying size and structural complexity (Tables 4 and 5). Table 4 summarizes the two evaluation environments. Configuration A corresponds to a smaller grid of size 7 × 7 with 12 collection points, 2 transmission nodes, and 5 obstacles. Configuration B represents a more complex setting with a 12 × 12 grid, 14 collection points, 3 transmission nodes, and 8 obstacles. Performance is evaluated over 𝐽 test = 300 randomly generated configurations that are disjoint from both training and validation sets. Here the success ratio is the fraction of test episodes in which the robot reaches the terminal set X𝑇 ,that is, visits every collection point and delivers every payload. As shown in Table 5, the engineered-feature model achieves higher mean rewards and attains a 100% success ratio in both configurations. The 

14 Table 1: Environment (configuration) parameters. 

Parameter Value 

Grid Size ( 𝑛 × 𝑛 ) 7 × 7Number of Collection Points 12 Number of Transmission Points 2Number of Obstacles 5Discount factor ( 𝛼 ) 0.95 Destruction probability ( 𝛿 ) 0.05 Table 2: Training parameters for DDQN. 

Parameter Value 

Exploration Rate ( 𝜖 ) 0.3 Number of Training Episodes 8000 Target Network Sync Frequency 500 Replay Memory Size 6000 Training Batch Size ( 𝐾 ) 800 Risk Batch Size ( 𝑁 ) 2Risk Weight ( 𝜘 ) 1Validation Frequency 50 Learning Rate ( 𝛽 ) 1 × 10 −5

raw-feature model achieves a lower mean reward of 236 .15 and a success ratio of 95% in configuration A, and cannot be evaluated at all on configuration B: its input dimension 5 𝑛 2 + 1 is tied to the grid size seen in training, so the trained network does not even accept an instance of a different size. This is not a quantitative deficiency but a structural one, and it is precisely what the 𝐺 -invariant, size-independent feature map of Section 5.3 removes. The engineered representation transfers without retraining from a 7 × 7 grid with 12 collection points to a 12 × 12 grid with 14 collection points, retaining a 100% success ratio. 

## 6.2 Risk-Averse Learning 

To model risk-averse behavior, we apply the mini-batch transition risk mapping introduced in Section 3, which replaces the standard conditional expectation in the Bellman operator with a coherent risk measure acting on mini-batches of 𝑁 sampled transitions. Setting 𝑁 = 1 recovers the risk-neutral (expected-value) baseline, whereas 𝑁 > 1 induces increasing sensitivity to worst-case outcomes within each mini-batch, interpolating between the risk-neutral policy and the worst-case (robust) policy as 𝑁 → ∞ . We instantiate this framework with 𝑁 = 2 and 𝜘 = 1, and compare against two baselines: (i) the risk-neutral policy (𝑁 = 1), and (ii) a highly conservative heuristic policy parameterized by 𝛾 = 2000. 

15 Table 3: Neural network architecture. 

Layer Dimension 

Input Layer ( 𝑙 1) 5𝑛 2 + 1 (raw) / 10 (engineered) Hidden Layer 1 ( 𝑙 2) 200 Hidden Layer 2 ( 𝑙 3) 200 Hidden Layer 3 ( 𝑙 4) 150 Hidden Layer 4 ( 𝑙 5) 150 Output Layer ( 𝑙 6) 2 

> (a) Training loss during learning (b) Cumulative reward learning during training

Figure 1: Comparison of optimization (Loss) and performance (Reward) during training     

> (a) CDF plot of rewards (losses only) in non-crash (b) CDF plot with stochastic failure 𝑝 =0.05

16 Table 4: Environment configurations used for test experiments. 

Configuration A B

Grid Size (7, 7) (12, 12) Collection points 12 14 Obstacles 5 8Transmission points 2 3Table 5: Comparison of different feature learning methodologies under different configurations sampled on 

𝐽 𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 300 in non crash setting 

Learning Methodology Configuration A Configuration B 

Mean Reward Success Ratio (%) Mean Reward Success Ratio (%) Raw Embedded 236.15 95.33 – –Engineered 259.56 100 184.74 100 

Evaluation is conducted over 300 randomly generated environments with fixed seeds. Each envi-ronment is defined on a 10 × 10 grid with 14 collection points, 3 transmission nodes, and 8 obstacles. To assess robustness under stochastic failures, we introduce vehicle destruction events with probabilities 

𝛿 ∈ { 0.05 , 0.10 }, simulated explicitly rather than absorbed into the discount factor (cf. Remark 5.1). Performance is quantified by two statistics: the mean reward and the first-order upper semideviation of the loss 𝐿 ,

𝜎 + (𝐿 ) = E  𝐿 − E[𝐿 ]

> +

 = 12 E 𝐿 − E[𝐿 ] ,

which is used in risk-measure theory to capture the variability in the unfavorable tail of the loss distri-bution [34]. It is worth recalling from (6) that E[𝐿 ] + 𝜅 𝜎 + (𝐿 ) is itself a coherent measure of risk for 

𝜅 ∈ [ 0, 1], consistent with second order dominance; 𝜎 + is therefore not an arbitrary dispersion statistic, but the dispersion term of a legitimate mean–risk model, which is what makes a comparison of policies in the (mean , 𝜎 +) plane meaningful. Table 6 demonstrates that the mini-batch policy with 𝑁 = 2 provides a particularly favorable risk– return profile across the different environment conditions. Under the nominal model, the 𝑁 = 2policy achieves a mean reward of 219 .99, compared with 229 .29 for the risk-neutral policy ( 𝑁 = 1), while simultaneously reducing the upper semideviation from 742 .44 to 719 .13. The reduction in mean performance is accompanied by a reduction in exposure to unfavorable outcomes attaining better mean– semideviation statistics for 𝜘 > 0.4. Under misspecification, the 𝑁 = 2 mini-batch policy exhibits a more favorable risk–return profile than the risk-neutral policy, improving both criteria simultaneously. At 𝛿 = 0.05, it increases the mean reward by 1 .8% while reducing 𝜎 + by 11 .8%. At 𝛿 = 0.10, the advantage becomes more pronounced, with a 35 .8% improvement in mean reward accompanied by an 8.6% reduction in 𝜎 +.This is not a paradox, and the mechanism is worth stating. Neither policy was trained under explicitly simulated destruction; following Remark 5.1, the destruction probability was absorbed into the discount factor, which is exact only for 𝑁 = 1. The crash scenarios are thus perturbations of the training model, and the dual representation (8) says precisely that minimizing a coherent risk measure is minimizing a worst case over an ambiguity set of transition kernels. The 𝑁 = 2 policy hedges against a family of kernels which happens to contain the perturbed ones. The mini-batch risk mapping supplies, at the 

17 Table 6: Mean value and upper semideviation over 300 held-out environments: 10 × 10 grid, 14 collection points, 3 transmitters, 8 obstacles. No crash Crash prob. = 0.05 Crash prob. = 0.10 Policy Mean Reward 𝜎 + Mean Reward 𝜎 + Mean Reward 𝜎 +

𝑁 = 1 229 .29 742 .44 127 .18 211 .12 38 .03 122 .26 

𝑁 = 2 219 .99 719 .13 129 .41 186 .22 51 .65 111 .70 

𝛾 = 2000 61 .79 805 .35 −66 .66 212 .20 −98 .41 118 .58 

price of one additional next-state sample, the kind of protection that a robust formulation would have to postulate explicitly. The heuristic 𝛾 -policy, by contrast, is conservative without being risk-averse in any principled sense. It degrades the mean severely, without a corresponding reduction of the tail: its upper semideviation is the largest of the three in the first two scenarios and essentially tied with the risk-neutral one in the third. A single scalar threshold, calibrated by a line search on one instance, cannot adapt to the risk–return structure of the problem, whereas 𝜘 and 𝑁 act on the risk measure itself. The empirical cumulative distribution functions in Figure 2 corroborate these findings: relative to 𝑁 = 1, the 𝑁 = 2 policy shifts mass away from the unfavorable tail in the crash scenarios, while the 𝛾 -policy exhibits the heaviest unfavorable tail in the no-crash case. To illustrate the behavioral differences, Figure 3 presents representative trajectories for one fixed environment on a small domain, in the absence of destruction events. Columns (a), (b), and (c) correspond, respectively, to the risk-neutral policy ( 𝑁 = 1), the risk-averse policy ( 𝑁 = 2), and the heuristic policy with 𝛾 = 2000, and the rows show successive stages of the same episode. Moreover, the robot and the elements of the environment are described in Table 7. 

Table 7: Symbols used to represent the elements of the underwater robot environment. 

Symbol Description 

# • Unvisited collection point 

# • Visited collection point whose information has not been transmitted 

# • Collection point whose information has been successfully transmitted 

# ▲ Transmission location 

# ■ Obstacle 

# ■ Robot 

A comparison of the trajectories shows that the 𝑁 = 2 policy behaves more conservatively: it avoids transporting a large accumulated payload along long paths, and it transmits at the nearest available transmission point instead. Under the cost structure of Section 5.2, the movement cost is proportional to the carried payload, so a long journey with a full payload is exactly the event that populates the unfavorable tail of the loss distribution; the risk-averse policy shortens the exposure at the price of a few additional visits to a transmission point. The corresponding statistics, reported in Table 8, display the dominance: the 𝑁 = 2 policy is giving 10% more mean reward 136 .008 against 123 .32 , with the 4 .5% reduction of the upper semideviation 355 .37 against 339 .18, whereas the heuristic policy loses almost half of the 

18 Figure 3: Comparison of trajectories under different trained policies a) Risk Neutral Policy ( 𝑁 = 1) b) Risk Averse Policy ( 𝑁 = 2) c) Heuristic 𝛾 = 2000 Policy 

mean reward while increasing the semideviation. These observations confirm that the mini-batch risk mapping induces a principled and data-driven approach to the expected cost and the tail risk, rather than an undiscriminating conservatism. 

19 Table 8: Reward and upper semideviation : 7 × 7 grid, 6 collection points, 1 transmitter, 3 obstacles. 

Policy Reward 𝝈 +

𝑁 = 1 123.324 355.37 

𝑁 = 2 136.008 339.18 

𝛾 = 2000 62.910 375.41 

# 7 Conclusions 

We have proposed a risk-averse deep Q-learning method for Markov decision processes whose policies are evaluated by dynamic, time-consistent Markov risk measures, and we have applied it to an underwater robot navigation problem of a size that excludes tabular methods. The construction rests on the mini-batch transition risk mappings of [12]. Their role here is to convert a nonlinear functional of the transition kernel, which cannot be estimated from a single observed transition, into an expected value of a function of 𝑁 next-state values, which can. Proposition 3.1 shows that little is lost in the process. For 𝑁 = 2, mixed with the conditional expectation, one obtains exactly the mean–Gini model. The batch size is therefore a legitimate and interpretable dial of risk aversion, and the smallest nontrivial choice 𝑁 = 2 already delivers a classical mean–risk model at the cost of one additional next-state sample per transition. On the algorithmic side, the combination with a double deep Q-network required a separate analysis of two distinct biases. The maximum over the mini-batch is not a source of bias at all: conditionally on the network parameters, it is an exact evaluation of 𝜎 ( 𝑁 ) at the current approximation, and this is what makes the whole scheme implementable. The action-selection bias is the familiar one and is removed by the double-network target; what remains is a convexity-induced bias of the opposite sign, which is conservative and therefore benign in a risk-averse method. Two devices proved decisive in the case study, and both are of a general character. The first is the hierarchical decomposition, which delegates the deterministic path-execution subproblem to an exact graph search and confines the learning budget to the genuinely uncertain high-level decision. The second is the invariant feature map: the model is invariant under the isometry group of the grid, all the engineered features are invariants of that group, and none of them depends on the size of the instance. This is what allows a single trained network to be applied, without retraining, to instances larger than any seen during training, while the raw encoding cannot even be evaluated on them. The numerical results are the most interesting outcome of this study. At the nominal model the risk-averse policy loses a little to the risk-neutral one in the mean, and is slightly better in the tail. Away from the nominal model, when destruction events are simulated explicitly rather than absorbed into the discount factor, it dominates the risk-neutral policy in both criteria. This is the empirical shadow of the dual representation (8): to minimize a coherent risk measure is to minimize a worst case over a set of kernels, and that set is what protects the policy against the perturbation. The heuristic threshold policy, by contrast, is conservative without being risk averse, and pays a large price in the mean without buying a reduction of the tail. Several questions remain open. First, our method carries no convergence guarantee. Convergence of risk-averse policy evaluation with a linear architecture was established in [25, 41], a reinforcement learning method with a linear architecture was proposed and analyzed in [42], but the extension to Q-learning with nonlinear approximators is open even in the risk-neutral case, and the nonsmoothness of the mini-batch maximum adds a difficulty of its own. Second, the hierarchical scheme is formally a semi-Markov model, and the interaction of time consistency with temporally extended actions (Remark 5.2) deserves separate treatment: what is the right notion of a risk-averse option, and when is the composition of one-step 

20 mappings along an option a mapping of the same type? Third, we deliberately restricted attention to the smallest batch sizes, and a systematic study of the trade-off among 𝑁 , 𝜘 , the statistical error, and the computational cost would be valuable; Proposition 3.1 suggests that 𝑁 and 𝜘 are not interchangeable, since they move the spectrum in different ways. Finally, the destruction risk was absorbed into the discount factor during training, which is exact only in the risk-neutral case (Remark 5.1); treating the killing event explicitly inside the risk mapping is entirely feasible and, in view of our results under misspecification, likely to be worthwhile. 

# References 

[1] C. Acerbi. Spectral measures of risk: A coherent representation of subjective risk aversion. Journal of Banking and Finance , 26(7):1505–1518, 2002. [2] P. Artzner, F. Delbaen, J.-M. Eber, and D. Heath. Coherent measures of risk. Mathematical Finance ,9(3):203–228, 1999. [3] A. Ayoub, Z. Jia, C. Szepesvari, M. Wang, and L. Yang. Model-based reinforcement learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 463–474. PMLR, 2020. [4] A. Basu, T. Bhattacharyya, and V. S. Borkar. A learning algorithm for risk-sensitive cost. Mathe-matics of Operations Research , 33(4):880–898, 2008. [5] D. P. Bertsekas. Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control . Athena Scientific, Boston, 2017. [6] V. Borkar. A sensitivity formula for risk-sensitive cost and the actor–critic algorithm. Systems & Control Letters , 44(5):339 – 346, 2001. [7] V. S. Borkar. Q-learning for risk-sensitive control. Mathematics of Operations Research , 27(2): 294–311, 2002. [8] S. J. Bradtke and A. G. Barto. Linear least-squares algorithms for temporal difference learning. 

Machine Learning , 22(1):33–57, 1996. [9] S. Bubeck, N. Cesa-Bianchi, et al. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-armed bandit problems. Foundations and Trends ® in Machine Learning , 5(1):1–122, 2012. [10] Y. Chow and M. Ghavamzadeh. Algorithms for CVaR optimization in MDPs. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 3509–3517, 2014. [11] Y. Chow, M. Ghavamzadeh, L. Janson, and M. Pavone. Risk-constrained reinforcement learning with percentile risk criteria. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(1):6070–6120, 2017. [12] D. Dentcheva and A. Ruszczyński. Mini-batch risk forms. SIAM Journal on Optimization , 33(2): 615–637, 2023. [13] D. Dentcheva and A. Ruszczyński. Risk-Averse Optimization and Control: Theory and Methods .Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 2024. [14] S. Dong, B. Van Roy, and Z. Zhou. Provably efficient reinforcement learning with aggregated states. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.06366 , 2019. 

21 [15] S. Du, S. Kakade, J. Lee, S. Lovett, G. Mahajan, W. Sun, and R. Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in RL. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,pages 2826–2836. PMLR, 2021. [16] J. Fan and A. Ruszczyński. Process-based risk measures and risk-averse control of discrete-time systems. Mathematical Programming , 191:113–140, 2022. [17] Y. Fei and R. Xu. Cascaded gaps: Towards logarithmic regret for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 6392–6417. PMLR, 2022. [18] Y. Fei, Z. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, and Q. Xie. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning: Near-optimal risk-sample tradeoff in regret. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33: 22384–22395, 2020. [19] Y. Fei, Z. Yang, and Z. Wang. Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning with function approximation: A debiasing approach. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 3198–3207. PMLR, 2021. [20] H. Föllmer and I. Penner. Convex risk measures and the dynamics of their penalty functions. 

Statistics & Decisions , 24(1/2006):61–96, 2006. [21] W. Huang and W. B. Haskell. Risk-aware Q-learning for Markov decision processes. In 2017 IEEE 56th Annual Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pages 4928–4933. IEEE, 2017. [22] G. N. Iyengar. Robust dynamic programming. Mathematics of Operations Research , 30(2):257–280, 2005. [23] C. Jin, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, and M. I. Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 2137–2143. PMLR, 2020. [24] M. N. Katehakis and L. C. Smit. A successive lumping procedure for a class of Markov chains. 

Probability in the Engineering and Informational Sciences , 26(4):483–508, 2012. [25] Ü. Köse and A. Ruszczyński. Risk-averse learning by temporal difference methods with markov risk measures. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(1):1800–1833, 2021. [26] S. Kusuoka. On law invariant coherent risk measures. Advances in Mathematical Economics , 3: 83–95, 2001. [27] T. Lam, A. Verma, B. K. H. Low, and P. Jaillet. Risk-aware reinforcement learning with coherent risk measures and non-linear function approximation. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [28] T. Lattimore and C. Szepesvári. Bandit algorithms . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2020. [29] W.-J. Ma, C. Oh, Y. Liu, D. Dentcheva, and M. M. Zavlanos. Risk-averse access point selection in wireless communication networks. IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Systems , 6(1):24–36, 2018. [30] F. S. Melo and M. I. Ribeiro. Q-learning with linear function approximation. In International Conference on Computational Learning Theory , pages 308–322. Springer, 2007. 

22 [31] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Ried-miller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski, S. Petersen, C. Beattie, A. Sadik, I. Antonoglou, H. King, D. Kumaran, D. Wierstra, S. Legg, and D. Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforce-ment learning. Nature , 518(7540):529–533, 2015. doi: 10.1038/nature14236. [32] A. Modi, N. Jiang, A. Tewari, and S. Singh. Sample complexity of reinforcement learning using linearly combined model ensembles. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 2010–2020. PMLR, 2020. [33] A. Nilim and L. El Ghaoui. Robust control of Markov decision processes with uncertain transition matrices. Operations Research , 53(5):780–798, 2005. [34] W. Ogryczak and A. Ruszczyński. From stochastic dominance to mean-risk models: Semideviations as risk measures. European Journal of Operational Research , 116(1):33–50, 1999. [35] W. Ogryczak and A. Ruszczyński. Dual stochastic dominance and related mean-risk models. SIAM Journal on Optimization , 13(1):60–78, 2002. [36] L. A. Prashanth and M. Ghavamzadeh. Actor-critic algorithms for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. CoRR , abs/1403.6530, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1403.6530 .[37] M. L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes . Wiley, Jersey City, NJ, 1994. [38] A. Ruszczyński. Risk-averse dynamic programming for Markov decision processes. Mathematical Programming , 125(2, Ser. B):235–261, 2010. [39] A. Ruszczyński. Erratum to: Risk-averse dynamic programming for Markov decision processes. 

Mathematical Programming , 145(1-2):601–604, 2014. [40] A. Ruszczyński and A. Shapiro. Optimization of convex risk functions. Mathematics of Operations Research , 31(3):433–452, 2006. [41] A. Ruszczyński and S. Yang. Risk-averse control of Markov systems with value function learning. 

Annals of Operations Research , pages 1–25, 2025. [42] A. Ruszczyński and T. Zhang. Reinforcement learning with Markov risk measures and multipattern risk approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.00654 , 2026. [43] R. S. Sutton. Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning , 3(1): 9–44, 1988. [44] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction . MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998. [45] R. S. Sutton, D. Precup, and S. Singh. Between MDPs and semi-MDPs: A framework for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial Intelligence , 112(1–2):181–211, 1999. [46] A. Tamar, D. Di Castro, and S. Mannor. Policy gradients with variance related risk criteria. In 

Proceedings of the twenty-ninth international conference on machine learning , pages 387–396, 2012. [47] A. Tamar, S. Mannor, and H. Xu. Scaling up robust MDPs using function approximation. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 181–189, 2014. 

23 [48] A. Tamar, Y. Chow, M. Ghavamzadeh, and S. Mannor. Sequential decision making with coherent risk. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 62(7):3323–3338, 2017. [49] J. N. Tsitsiklis and B. Van Roy. An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function approxi-mation. IEEE Fransactions on Automatic Control , 42(5):674–690, 1997. [50] H. van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double Q-learning. In 

Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 2094–2100, Phoenix, Arizona, 2016. AAAI Press. [51] Z. Yang and M. Wang. Reinforcement learning in feature space: Matrix bandit, kernels, and regret bound. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 10746–10756. PMLR, 2020. [52] M. Yin, Y. Duan, M. Wang, and Y.-X. Wang. Near-optimal offline reinforcement learning with linear representation: Leveraging variance information with pessimism. In International Conference on Learning Representation , 2022. [53] S. Yitzhaki. Stochastic dominance, mean variance, and Gini’s mean difference. The American Economic Review , 72(1):178–185, 1982. [54] P. Yu, W. B. Haskell, and H. Xu. Approximate value iteration for risk-aware Markov decision processes. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 63(9):3135–3142, 2018. 

24